•sA 


1 


i 


/ 


By  '  C.  N .  HOLFORD 


cJV9 


0- 


/ 


Given  By 


1  1x<l  Ma-rmeTS  W  ous.6 


■  ,7  r~  * 

. 

. 

i  r>  "  1  fir,  Vf  r.!^,r 


-V  ' 

v,  ;v 

**  •  v 


'•  *«.•■  ."r  f*  •  -  <v  ' 

4.//.  )>•.•"  1  •?.%;"  ,  *;  tJS  \  .:  *"  */  V.  '  ‘ 

^  >  f  <:,CCv^s.-j ~  "•••?  :CyV:,*/  - 

- 

;  ■fv,:.;  ,  ; 

»  >  '  •  S  fa'  V  '  '  ^ 


,  •  v*: 


t 


*  v  ’  ,'7i>  >  WY 

- 

TV  .  <.,r 

■ .  .  '  — 5> 

y  ,f  -  .  .*<•  •  ..• 

-  ■■  p."  ■  '■-••  ■•?  •  •  •-  ■  ■?  ■.,••»• 1  ■  .*  -  • 

-  .5  .  '  4  .  ’ 

' 


_ 


ARISTOPIA 


iSomanccd^igtorp  of  tfjc  $eto  R£>orib 

ij 1  f  oH  >  n  s^~— 
1 


CASTELLO  N.  HOLFORD 

*  • 


c 

BOSTON 

ARENA  PUBLISHING  COMPANY 

Copley  Square 

i895 


•  HU77 

f\ju 


Copyrighted,  1895, 

BY 

C.  N.  HOLFORD, 


All  Rights  Reserved. 


"\V  htfStf  *  »■« 1 

n 

•••  . 

eC;  5  •  * 

5  «  c  *  *  « 

c  «£  ••c  •••  .  c 


c 
o 
c 
c  c 


0  c  c 
c  c 

l  .« 

f'  c  , 


e  ® 


c  <  c 
c  o 
©<  c 

«c8- 


tec 


€  6  * 

« 

*  , 


INTRODUCTION. 


Books  giving  ns  a  history  of  the  future — a 
future  bright  with  the  millennial  dawn  of  the 
optimist  or  dark  with  the  goblin-haunted  night 
of  the  pessimist — books  in  French,  with  a 
future  French  and  fantastic,  and  books  in 
English,  with  a  future  Anglo-Saxon  and  matter- 
of-fact — are  much  in  vogue.  But  of  books 
giving  a  history  of  the  past  as  it  might  have 
been  if  the  current  of  events  had  been  turned 
at  a  critical  point  by  some  man  with  sufficient 
virtue  and  mental  power,  combined  with  the 
power  which  some  fortunate  material  circum¬ 
stance  might  have  given  him,  I  know  not  one. 

Alas  for  the  world  that  the  makers  of  his¬ 
tory  who  have  had  the  greatest  powers  com¬ 
bined  with  the  greatest  opportunities  have  been 
men  whose  selfish  aims  have  made  their  utmost 
efforts  recoil  in  ruin  on  their  own  heads  ! 

Washington,  indeed,  had  great  virtues,  a 
great  opportunity,  and  good  talents ;  but 
neither  was  his  opportunity  the  greatest  that 


4 


INTRODUCTION. 


history  has  furnished,  nor  his  mental  power 
so  vast,  nor  his  vision  of  the  future  so 
far-reaching  and  clairvoyant  as  that  of  many 
who  have  lived  before  him  and  since,  nor  was 
his  devotion  to  the  welfare  of  mankind  so 
ardent  and  all-absorbing. 

The  “  Fathers  of  the  Constitution  ”  have 
been  much  praised  for  their  wisdom  and  fore¬ 
sight,  and  with  justice ;  but  there  have  been 
men  with  no  opportunities  like  theirs  who 
were  able  to  look  much  farther  into  the  future, 
and  who  were  much  more  in  advance  of  their 
age.  There  were  evils  which  the  leaders  of 
the  Revolution  ought  to  have  foreseen  and 
probably  did  not,  and  others  they  may  have 
foreseen  but  had  no  power  to  avert. 

Their  power  was  limited,  and  the  materials 
with  which  they  had  to  work  were  refractory. 
Old  evils  were  so  deeply  imbedded  in  the 
customs,  prejudices,  and  thoughts  of  men  when 
our  government  was  forming  that  the  influence 
of  a  Washington,  a  Jefferson,  and  an  Adams 
would  have  striven  in  vain  to  eradicate  them. 
Then,  too,  there  were  evils  of  which  they 
could  have  had  no  conception.  They  could 
not  have  foreseen  the  application  of  steam- 
power  to  transportation  and  manufacturing, 


INTRODUCTION. 


5 


making  a  few  men  of  great  wealth  as  much 
the  lords  of  the  great  highways  as  were  the 
robber  barons  of  the  Middle  Ages,  with  their 
castles  in  every  mountain  pass  and  on  every 
river  ford,  taking  ruinous  toll  of  every 
traveler;  and  the  owners  of  vast  “ plants”  of 
machinery  as  absolutely  lords  of  the  workmen 
who  attend  the  machines  and  the  greater  num¬ 
ber  who  are  displaced  by  the  machines  as  ever 
the  feudal  baron  was  lord  of  the  serfs  and 
villeins  on  his  estates.  Even  if  they  had  fore¬ 
seen  these  evils  it  is  hard  to  see  how  they  could 
have  prevented  them ;  they  came  too  late ; 
their  power  was  too  small. 

And  from  these  evils  it  has  come  that  this 
great  republic  of  the  new  world,  so  long  the 
hope  of  the  poor  and  oppressed  of  the  old 
world,  is  fast  becoming  like  Europe  socially,  and 
threatens  to  become  even  worse  than  Europe. 
Now,  when  the  bounties  of  nature,  which  a 
little  while  ago  seemed  exhaustless,  have  been 
all  appropriated,  this  favored  land  presents  the 
most  violent  contrasts  of  wealth  with  its  pitiless 
power,  and  poverty  with  its  abject  weakness. 
The  disinherited  begin  to  feel  their  doom  : 
their  blind  and  hopeless  but  strong  and  des¬ 
perate  struggles  against  that  doom  have  already 


6 


INTRODUCTION. 


begun  in  wasting  strikes  and  bloody  riots  ;  and 
at  every  new  outburst  the  wave  of  fire  and 
blood  spreads  wider  and  rises  higher. 

W e  reproach  the  nations  of  Europe  with  their 
millions  of  armed  men,  but  those  millions  are 
levied  to  repel  the  invasion  of  foreign  foes.  In 
our  land  it  is  hardly  a  secret  that  the  millions 
of  militia  are  mustering  and  drilling  for  the 
principal  purpose  of  suppressing  insurrection 
against  the  plutocracy  by  the  “  lower  classes  ” — 
the  laboring  class  of  our  own  citizens.  In 
every  American  city  are  rising  the  castles  of 
the  plutocracy  in  the  shape  of  great  armories 
for  the  militia. 

But  why,  some  may  ask,  should  we  turn  from 
a  future  thus  dark  and  threatening,  to  look  vainly 
on  a  past  which  might  have  been,  but  which, 
alas  !  never  was  ?  W ell,  I  could  never  quite 
agree  with  the  philosophy  of  Whittier’s  oft- 
quoted  couplet : 

“  Of  all  sad  words  of  tongue  or  pen 

The  saddest  are  these :  It  might  have  been.” 

or  Dante’s  despairing  cry  of  a  lost  soul : 

“  Nessun  maggior  dolore 
Che  ricordarse  del  tempo  felice 
Nella  miseria.” 


INTRODUCTION. 


7 


(There  is  no  greater  grief  than  memory  of 
happy^  days  in  misery ;  or,  as  the  hero  of  Ten¬ 
nyson’s  “  Locksley  Hall  ”  paraphrases  it,  u  a 
sorrow’s  crown  of  sorrow  is  remembering  hap¬ 
pier  things.”  )  Not  so.  It  is  a  relief  and  a 
solace,  a  pleasure,  although  a  mournful  one,  in 
the  misery  that  is,  to  contemplate  the  happiness 
that  was  or  might  have  been.  Then,  too, 
the  looking  back  upon  the  parting  of  the  ways 
which  led  us  from  happiness  to  misery  may 
teach  us  to  look  forward  to  the  parting  of  the 
ways  which  may  lead  from  misery  to  happiness. 
Studying  the  opportunities  which  we  have  lost 
may  teach  us  to  grasp  the  opportunities  which 
are  to  come. 

Let  us,  then,  take  what  pleasure  we  may  in 
figuring  a  man  of  great  wisdom,  foresight,  and 
genius,  with  an  unselfish  devotion  to  the  wel¬ 
fare  of  humanity,  placed  with  immense  power 
at  the  parting  of  the  ways  in  the  course  of 
human  events,  seizing  the  opportunity  to  turn 
the  march  of  bewildered  and  struggling  hu¬ 
manity  into  the  path  leading  up  and  away  from 
the  dangerous  marshes  over  which  dance  the 
deluding  ignesfatui  of  ancient  errors,  and  under 
which  lie  the  black  quagmires  of  antique  evils. 
Thus  to  contemplate  the  past  which  might  have 


8 


INTRODUCTION. 


been  may  in  some  small  measure  teach  us  to 
discern  in  the  future  the  opportunity,  to  seize 
which — if  there  be  no  one  man  with  sufficient 
wisdom,  power,  and  virtue — there  may  be  found 
a  combination  of  men  whose  aggregate  wisdom, 
power,  and  virtue  may  be  sufficient  to  turn  the 
march  of  events  out  of  the  night  of  civiliza¬ 
tion’s  destruction  which  some  prophets  see 
close  ahead,  into  the  brighter  day  foreseen  by 
the  seers  of  the  Millennium. 

I  cannot  afford,  as  some  greater  story-tellers 
have  calmly  and  confidently  done,  to  ignore  the 
possibilities,  not  to  mention  the  probabilities. 
But,  some  may  say,  your  story  of  the  mass  of 
gold  is  an  utter  impossibility.  Not  so.  That 
such  a  mass  of  gold  has  never  been  found  is 
true ;  that  it  does  not  exist  and  cannot  be  dis¬ 
covered  by  no  means  follows.  If  the  theory 
is  true  that  the  surface  of  the  earth  was  once 
molten  and  liquid,  the  gold,  by  its  immense 
weight,  must  have  sunk  below  the  lighter 
elements  so  far  that  when  the  crust  of  the 
earth  became  solid  it  could  have  come  to  the 
surface  only  by  means  of  an  eruption  from 
a  great  depth.  That  the  amount  of  gold  in 
the  whole  globe  is  so  small,  in  comparison  with 
the  rest  of  the  materials,  as  seems  from  the 


INTRODUCTION. 


9 


amount  found  upon  the  surface  is  not  at  all 
probable.  In  the  depths  of  the  earth  are  prob¬ 
ably  hundreds  of  thousands  of  cubic  miles  of 
gold.  An  eruption  from  so  great  a  depth  as  to 
throw  up  a  few  hundred  cubic  feet  of  gold  in  a 
single  mass  would  be  by  no  means  a  marvel; 
and  a  few  hundred  cubic  feet  of  gold,  although 
of  almost  incalculable  value,  would  be  of  trifling 
bulk  compared  with  the  mass  of  lighter  mate¬ 
rials  thrown  out  at  every  volcanic  eruption. 

The  region  in  which  this  narrative  locates 
the  mine  contains  numerous  quartz  dikes  in 
which  some  gold  has  been  found. 

The  world  has  had  many  men  with  even 
greater  virtues,  clearer  foresight,  and  more  en¬ 
tire  devotion  to  the  good  of  humanity  than 
have  been  ascribed  to  Ralph  Morton.  That 
the  opportunity  of  a  new  continent  on  which  a 
new  civilization  could  be  wrought  out  existed 
three  hundred  years  ago  is  a  matter  of  history. 
Given  then,  the  man,  the  means,  and  the  op¬ 
portunity,  the  natural  result  would  be  as 
follows : 


\ 


ARISTOPIA. 


CHAPTER  I. 


On  a  blustering  December  day  in  1607  a 
ship  was  working  its  way  up  the  James  River 
in  Virginia.  It  was  the  English  ship  Sea  Gull, 
Captain  Christopher  Newport,  bringing  what 
was  called  the  “  First  Supply  ”  to  the  infant 
colony  at  Jamestown,  planted  seven  months 
before. 

Seventy  new  colonists  swarmed  the  decks  of 
the  vessel,  their  gaze  eagerly  bent  forward  to 
discover  their  goal,  the  little  cluster  of  cabins 
over  which  floated  the  red  cross  flag  of  Eng¬ 
land,  now  visible  far  away  up  the  river. 

A  strong  northerly  wind  was  blowing,  hurry¬ 
ing  the  broken  cloud-rack  across  the  sky.  It 
was  the  remains  of  a  gale  which  had  swept 
the  coast  the  day  before,  when  the  Sea  Gull 
and  her  consort,  the  Phoenix,  were  striving  to 


11 


12 


ARISTOPIA. 


get  between  the  capes  of  the  Chesapeake.  The 
Sea  Gull  succeeded,  but  the  Phoenix  was  ill 
built  to  work  to  windward,  the  wind  being 
somewhat  westerly,  and  she  was  driven  back 
and  had  to  bear  off  to  sea  to  escape  the  danger¬ 
ous  coast  which  stretches  far  southward  from 
Cape  Henry.  But  now  the  wind  had  veered  to 
a  few  points  east  of  north  and  the  Sea  Gull 
was  making  fair  headway.  Soon  her  passen¬ 
gers  could  see  every  detail  of  the  little  village  : 
the  twenty-five  or  thirty  log  cabins  thatched 
with  reeds  ;  the  stockade  inclosing  the  village ; 
the  dark,  leafless  forest  behind  ;  the  bare  spots 
on  the  river  bank  white  with  snow  (for  it  was 
an  unprecedentedly  severe  winter),  and  the 
throng  of  people  on  the  bank  eagerly  awaiting 
the  arrival  of  the  ship  with  every  demonstra¬ 
tion  of  joy. 

Arrived  in  front  of  the  village,  the  sails 
were  reefed  and  the  anchor  was  dropped.  The 
ship  swung  in  almost  against  the  bank,  so 
much  deeper  was  the  water  then  than  now, 
when  the  mud  from  the  plowed  fields  has  been 
washing  in  for  nearly  three  centuries.  So  near 
she  lay  that  with  her  boats  and  some  planks 
a  bridge  was  formed  from  the  ship  to  the 
shore  and  lines  were  run  out  from  stem  and 


ARIST0P1A. 


13 


stern,  and  fastened  to  trees  on  the  bank  as 
moorings  for  the  vessel. 

Captain  Newport  went  ashore  and  was  im¬ 
mediately  shaking  hands  with  his  friends  and 
members  of  the  council.  Before  he  set  foot 
on  the  shore  he  became  aware  that  some  evil 
cloud  was  overshadowing  the  little  colony 
which  he  had  left  in  fair  circumstances  six 
months  before.  Although  the  men  were  shout- 
ing  and  tossing  their  hats  with  joy,  it  was  rather 
the  joy  of  prison-worn  captives  at  the  open¬ 
ing  of  their  dungeon  doors  than  anything  else 
he  could  think  of.  Then,  too,  there  were  not 
half  so  many  as  he  expected.  He  hoped  the 
rest  were  away  at  work  in  the  woods,  but  he 
feared  not. 

As  soon  as  possible  he  sought  out  one  of  the 
council,  a  stalwart  man  with  a  rough,  heavy 
beard  and  a  face  browned  and  seamed  by  a  life 
of  exposure  and  warfare  in  all  four  quarters  of 
the  globe — in  short,  Captain  John  Smith — to 
learn  what  had  passed  in  the  colony  since  his 
departure.  Newport  and  Smith  were  both 
members  of  the  council,  and  as  such  had  never 
agreed ;  but,  although  Newport  was  vain  and 
incompetent  and  jealous  of  Smith,  he  knew  the 
latter  was  honest  and  competent  and  would  tell 


14 


AB I  STOP  I A. 


him  truly  how  things  had  gone  in  his  absence. 
And  the  story  came  straight  and  blunt  from 
the  mouth  of  the  old  soldier  : 

When  the  ships  had  departed  for  England  the 
colonists  had  been  reduced  to  live  on  boiled  wheat 
and  barley,  mouldy  and  wormy  from  u  frying 
twenty-six  weeks  in  the  ship’s  hold,”  as  Smith 
said;  for  the  voyage  out — of  a  piece  with 
the  folly  of  the  whole  enterprise — had  been 
made  by  way  of  the  Canaries  and  the  West 
Indies,  and  they  had  loitered  months  in  the 
tropical  waters  of  those  islands.  No  well  had 
been  dug,  and  the  water  of  the  river  was  warm, 
brackish,  and  impure  with  vegetable  matter. 
The  site  of  the  settlement  was  a  low  bank,  the 
highest  part  no  more  than  twelve  feet  above 
the  river,  and  surrounded  with  marshes,  so  that 
in  warm  weather  the  night  air  was  always 
laden  with  deadly  malaria.  One  of  the  coun¬ 
cil,  Bartholomew  Gosnold  (the  first  English  sea- 
captain  who  had  sense  enough  to  sail  straight 
across  the  Atlantic  from  England  to  Virginia), 
had  strongly  opposed  the  chosen  site,  well 
knowing  the  danger  of  malaria,  of  which  he 
was  among  the  first  to  perish.  He  had  favored 
a  location  on  a  high  bank  twenty  miles  below 
Jamestown.  Smith,  being  under  arrest  at  the 


ARISTOPIA. 


15 


time,  could  not  aid  Gosnold  in  his  protest. 
Their  president,  the  vain,  foolish,  cowardly, 
jealous,  greedy,  selfish,  and  otherwise  con¬ 
temptible  Wingfield,  had  weighed  like  an  in¬ 
cubus  on  the  colony  for  months,  as  Smith  then 
said  and  afterward  wrote,  “  ingrossing  to  his  pri¬ 
vate,  Oatmeale,  Sacke,  Oyle,  Aqua  vitae,  Beefe, 
Egges,  or  what  not,”  leaving  the  others  to  starve. 
At  last  the  endurance  of  the  colonists  was  worn 
out,  and  they  deposed  Wingfield  and  elected 
John  Ratcliff e  president ;  but  the  latter  was 
little  better  than  King  Log.  They  lived  on  fish 
and  crabs  until  September,  when  they  managed 
to  get  some  corn  from  the  Indians.  Instead 
of  arriving  in  time  to  clear  fields  and  plant 
crops  in  the  spring  and  raise  some  provisions 
as  they  had  expected,  by  ill  luck  and  folly  com¬ 
bined  they  were  five  months  upon  the  voyage, 
consuming  their  provisions.  Nearly  all  the 
men  were  unused  to  labor,  and  the  necessary 
work  in  building  their  houses  and  planting 
their  stockade  in  such  a  burning  sun  as  they 
had  never  seen  in  England  had  broken  them 
down.  Then  chills  and  fever  from  malaria  and 
bowel  complaints  from  bad  food  and  water 
seized  upon  them  and  carried  off  more  than  half 
their  number.  Death  had  been  more  certain 


16 


ARISTOPIA. 


because  many  of  them  had  for  years  lived  dissi¬ 
pated  and  reckless  lives.  F rom  the  incompetence 
of  the  rest  of  the  council  Smith  had  to  bear 
the  brunt  of  everything.  When  he  was  at 
the  settlement  he  was  constantly  urging  the 
lazy  fellows,  who  had  never  before  done  a  day’s 
manual  labor,  to  the  rude  toil,  always  taking 
the  heavy  end  of  every  task  himself.  Much  of 
the  time  he  was  away,  striving  to  get  corn 
from  the  Indians.  Returning  from  one  of 
these  expeditions,  he  found  Wingfield  and 
Kendall,  another  of  the  council,  with  some 
others,  about  to  desert  with  the  pinnace,  a  little 
vessel  of  twenty  tons  which  had  been  left 
for  the  use  of  the  colonists.  Smith  promptly 
fired  upon  them  with  cannon  and  muskets,  kill¬ 
ing  Kendall  and  forcing  the  others  to  return 
or  be  sunk  in  the  river.  With  the  approach  of 
winter  the  rivers  were  swarming  with  wild 
geese  and  ducks,  which,  with  the  Indian 
corn,  gave  the  colonists  good  fare.  Not  satis¬ 
fied,  the  council  began  to  tax  Smith  with  being 
slow  to  discover  the  head  of  the  Chickahominy 
River.  What  they  wanted  with  the  head  of 
that  river  it  is  hard  to  tell;  but  Smith,  to 
satisfy  them,  set  out  to  find  it.  V enturing  too 
far  alone,  he  was  captured  by  the  Indians  and 


I 


ABISTOPIA.  17 

held  prisoner  six  or  seven  weeks.  By  his 
courage  and  address  he  not  only  saved  his  life, 
but  was  enabled  to  obtain  his  freedom  and 
greatly  enhance  his  reputation  and  influence 
among  the  savages,  much  to  the  advantage  of 
the  colony.  He  had  just  returned  from  this 
captivity  when  the  ship  returned  from  England. 
On  his  return  he  found  that  things  had  gone 
very  badly  in  his  absence. 

“  And  now,  Captain  Newport,”  said  Smith 
in  conclusion,  “what  sort  of  fellows  have  you 
brought  us  this  time  ?  Good,  stout,  honest 
laborers  and  mechanics,  or,  like  the  first  lot, 
jail-birds  and  gentlemen,  most  of  the  latter 
little  more  honest  and  a  good  deal  more  lazy 
than  the  former?  ” 

“  Not  what  I  could  wish,  I  must  confess,” 
said  Newport.  “  I  fear  too  many  of  them  are 
unruly  gallants  packed  off  by  their  relatives  to 
escape  ill  destinies  at  home.” 

And  so,  to  the  misfortune  of  the  colony, 
they  were. 

Among  the  seventy  passengers  streaming 
across  that  improvised  bridge  from  the  ship  to 
the  shore,  eager  to  press  foot  upon  the  soil  of 
the  new  world,  was  one  who  will  soon  become 

the  central  figure  of  this  narrative.  His  name 

2 


18 


ARISTOPIA. 


was  Ralph  Morton.  He  was  hardly  twenty 
years  old,  of  medium  size  but  strongly  built 
and,  unlike  too  many  of  those  immigrants, 
with  a  constitution  not  undermined  by  any 
vice. 

He  was  the  fourth  son  of  a  Kentish  gentle¬ 
man  who  had  been  killed  in  the  war  with  Spain 
about  the  end  of  Queen  Elizabeth’s  reign. 
His  home  was  near  the  mouth  of  the  Thames. 
Having  in  early  childhood  shown  a  great  apti¬ 
tude  for  learning,  it  was  intended  that  he 
should  be  a  physician.  He  had  learned  all  that 
could  be  taught  in  the  village  school  and  from 
such  tutors  as  could  be  obtained  in  his  native 
village.  His  father’s  death  left  his  mother  in 
such  straitened  circumstances  that  she  could  not 
send  him  to  college,  so  he  was  sent  to  London  to 
live  with  his  brother-in-law  and  pick  up  what 
learning  he  could  from  the  libraries  to  which 
he  had  access  and  from  such  occasional  tutor¬ 
ing  as  he  could  get.  This  brother-in-law,  a 
native  of  Ralph’s  village,  had  married  Ralph’s 
only  sister  (several  years  older  than  Ralph)  be¬ 
fore  he  had  determined  to  convert  his  country 
property  into  money  and  abandon  the  dull  and 
unprofitable  life  of  a  country  gentleman  for  the 
career  of  a  London  merchant,  although  in  that 


APIS  TOPI  A. 


19 


age  a  gentleman  was  considered  as  losing  caste 
by  “  going  into  trade.” 

Ralph  learned  Latin  quickly,  but  he  had 
little  taste  for  Greek  and  spent  little  time  upon 
it.  The  education  of  that  time  in  England 
consisted  almost  altogether  of  the  languages 
and  theology.  To  the  latter  Ralph  had  a 
great  aversion,  and  avoided  it  entirely.  Most 
of  the  books  of  that  age  in  the  English  language 
were  devoted  to  theological  controversy.  The 
bulk  of  what  Ralph  considered  worth  knowing 
was  in  Latin,  French,  and  Italian.  There  were 
also  many  valuable  books  of  travel  in  the 
Spanish  language  which  Ralph  desired  to  read. 
With  a  good  knowledge  of  Latin,  enough 
French,  Spanish,  and  Italian  to  enable  him  to 
read  fluently  was  quickly  learned.  He  could 
find  about  London  enough  Huguenot  refugees 
and  Spanish  sailors  from  whom  to  learn  the 
spoken  French  and  Spanish.  Thus  equipped,  he 
read  everything  he  could  find  in  the  way  of  his¬ 
tory,  travels  and  natural  science  The  sciences, 
even  mathematics,  were  then  at  a  very  low  ebb 
in  England,  and  little  taught.  Even  the  great 
Bacon  was  ignorant  of  geometry.  But  Ralph 
found  a  Genoese  tutor  in  London,  and  made 
good  progress  in  mathematics  and  astronomy. 


20 


ARISTOPIA. 


Finally,  being  overcome  with  that  irresistible 
desire  for  adventure  which  often  seizes  upon 
even  the  most  studious  of  youths,  he  had  be¬ 
come  an  emigrant  to  Virginia. 


ARISTOPIA. 


21 


CHAPTER  II. 

Captain  Newport  was  not  only  a  member 
of  the  colonial  council,  but  as  the  medium  of 
communication  between  the  Virginia  Company 
in  London  and  the  council  at  Jamestown  he 
enjoyed  particular  importance.  Even  Captain 
Smith,  so  imperious  with  the  rest,  deferred 
much  more  to  Newport  than  to  the  president  of 
the  council,  and  represented  him  to  the  Indians 
as  his  u  father.” 

Newport  very  much  desired  to  conciliate  the 
great  chief  of  that  region,  whom  the  English 
called  King  Powhatan.  By  the  way,  the  name 
Powhatan  was  not  only  the  name  of  the  chief, 
but  the  Indian  name  for  the  whole  region  and 
its  inhabitants,  and  for  the  river  which  the 
English  called  the  James. 

Newport  did  not  like  Smith’s  masterful  way 
of  acquiring  ascendency  over  the  Indians,  but 
thought  liberal  and  ostentatious  presents  the 
best  way.  Immediately  on  his  arrival  he  sent 
by  messenger  some  presents  to  Powhatan,  and 


22 


ARISTOPIA. 


as  soon  as  the  pinnace  could  be  got  ready  in 
a  style  to  suit  his  ideas  he  set  out  to  visit  the 
great  chief,  taking  with  him  Captain  Smith 
and  Matthew  Scrivener  (who  had  just  come  over 
and  had  immediately  been  elected  a  member  of 
the  council),  and  a  party  of  forty  men,  of 
whom  Ralph  Morton  was  one. 

Powhatan’s  residence  was  at  Werowocomo- 
co,  on  the  Pamunky  River  (since  called  the 
York),  only  twelve  miles  from  Jamestown  over¬ 
land,  but  Newport  concluded  to  go  by  water. 
Arrived  near  the  Indian  town,  Newport’s  heart 
failed  him  as  he  thought  of  trusting  himself 
among  the  warriors  of  the  redoubtable  chief. 
Smith,  to  reassure  him,  landed  with  twenty 
men  (among  them  Morton)  and  proceeded  to 
Powhatan’s  village,  which  was  some  distance 
from  the  river.  There  were  some  small  but 
deep  and  miry  creeks  to  cross,  over  which  the 
Indians  had  made  frail  bridges  composed  of 
poles  laid  in  crotches  stuck  in  the  mire.  These 
Smith  suspected  to  be  traps,  but  was  reassured 
by  making  some  of  his  Indian  guides  go  over 
them  first. 

Arrived  at  the  village,  two  or  three  hundred 
savages  conducted  the  Englishmen  into  Pow¬ 
hatan’s  presence.  The  chief  had  arranged  his 


ARISTOPIA. 


23 


greatest  pomp  for  the  occasion.  He  was 
seated  on  a  bed  of  mats  with  a  leather  pillow 
embroidered  with  pearls  and  heads  made  of 
bits  of  shell.  He  was  attired  in  a  robe  of  furs. 
At  each  side  close  by  him  sat  one  of  the  fair¬ 
est  of  his  harem,  and  farther  away  twenty  of 
his  women,  their  faces  and  arms  stained  red 
with  pocone  root,  and  about  their  necks  great 
chains  of  shell  beads.  As  an  emblem  of  his 
hospitality,  forty  wooden  platters,  full  of  corn- 
bread,  were  arranged  in  two  rows,  one  on  each 
side  of  the  door.  Powhatan  caused  a  procla¬ 
mation  to  be  made  that  on  pain  of  death  none 
was  to  molest  any  of  his  guests.  The  acquaint¬ 
ance  begun  between  Smith  and  the  chief  dur¬ 
ing  the  former’s  captivity  was  renewed  in  a 
long  conversation.  Then  the  chief  entertained 
his  guests  with  the  dancing  and  barbarous 
dramatic  performances  of  his  women,  and 
with  a  feast,  and  gave  them  lodging  for  the 
night. 

The  next  day  Newport,  being  informed  that 
all  was  well,  came  ashore.  The  party  spent 
three  or  four  days  at  the  place.  Usually  the 
Indian  chiefs  would  not  allow  their  men  to 
trade  with  the  whites  until  they,  the  chiefs, 
had  done  their  trading,  but  this  time  Powhatan 


24 


ARISTOPIA. 


would  not  trade  until  the  last.  Then  he  said 
to  Newport,  through  Smith  as  interpreter  : 

“  It  does  not  befit  my  greatness  to  haggle 
with  you  about  each  separate  trifle.  Lay  all 
your  goods  in  a  heap,  and  I  will  take  what 
pleases  me  and  give  you  what  I  think  it  is 
worth.” 

“  A  right  royal  trader  is  this,”  said  Smith, 
with  a  twinkle  of  the  eye.  “  He  will  please 
himself,  I  assure  you,  but  the  trade  he  will 
make  you  will  little  pleasure  or  advantage  you . 
Rather  put  the  boot  on  the  other  leg.  Tell 
the  cunning  old  rascal  to  measure  out  twenty 
hogsheads  of  corn  and  you  will  give  him  such 
trinkets  as  you  think  is  right.” 

“  Nay,  nay,”  said  Newport.  “  Rather  let  us 
outbrave  the  barbarian  with  the  greatness  of 
our  generosity,  and  so  bewitch  him  with  our 
bounty  as  we  may  have  what  we  list  of  his.” 

“Not  at  all,”  said  Smith.  “You  will  find 
the  savage’s  desire  unsatiable.  You  will  give 
him  such  a  conceit  of  himself  as  will  make  him 
think  himself  everything  and  us  nothing.” 

But  Newport  gave  the  chief  his  way,  and  the 
latter  helped  himself  liberally  to  the  English 
goods,  and  gave  in  return  about  four  bushels  of 


corn. 


ABISTOPIA. 


25 


Newport,  who  had  expected  enough  to  sup¬ 
ply  his  whole  colony,  looked  aghast. 

“  Corn  were  better  cheap  in  Spain,”  said 
Smith,  dryly. 

Then,  as  if  carelessly,  he  let  the  chief  see 
some  bright  blue  beads,  and  in  answer  to  the 
chief’s  inquiry  informed  him  that  such  orna¬ 
ments  were  only  for  great  kings,  and  that  he 
would  not  part  with  them,  as  he  wanted  to 
keep  them  for  the  kings  of  the  Monacans  and 
Massawomeks,  mortal  enemies  of  the  Powhat- 
ans.  In  the  end  the  old  chief  became  so  de¬ 
termined  to  have  the  beads  that  he  gave  about 
two  hundred  and  fifty  bushels  of  corn  for  them. 

Leaving  Powhatan,  Newport’s  party  visited 
Opechankanough,  Powhatan’s  brother,  who 
ruled  over  the  Pamunkies,  and  supplied  him 
and  his  harem  with  these  royal  blue  beads  for 
a  large  amount  of  corn,  and  then  returned  to 
Jamestown  with  their  supply. 

The  new  comers  were  quartered  in  the  cabins 
with  the  first  settlers,  whose  number  had  been 
so  thinned  by  death.  For  a  while  they  were 
quite  comfortable,  in  spite  of  the  extreme  cold 
weather.  But  one  night  some  of  the  royster- 
ing  gallants  got  to  throwing  firebrands  around, 
and  set  fire  to  one  of  the  thatched  roofs.  In  a 


AHISTOPIA. 


26 

few  minutes  the  little  village  was  in  a  raging 
conflagration.  Every  house  was  burned,  and 
the  stockade  was  destroyed  in  many  places. 
Some  even  lost  their  bedding  in  the  confusion. 
Ralph  Morton  was  well  supplied  with  blankets, 
and  had  presence  of  mind  enough  to  get  them 
out  of  the  burning  cabin,  and  to  carry  them 
and  his  little  chest  down  to  the  water’s  edge  to 
escape  the  intense  heat.  But  his  little  shelf 
of  books  was  destroyed.  The  chaplain  of  the 
colony,  Mr.  Robert  Hunt,  had  a  considerable 
library,  which  was  destroyed,  to  his  great  grief, 
and  not  a  little  to  Ralph’s  sorrow,  as  the  good 
parson  was  almost  as  much  pleased  to  loan  the 
books  to  Ralph  as  to  use  them  himself.  For¬ 
tunately,  most  of  the  corn  remained  still  in  the 
pinnace,  and  most  of  the  stores  in  the  ship,  or 
the  colony  would  soon  have  starved  outright. 


ARISTOPIA. 


27 


CHAPTER  III. 

With  as  much  promptness  as  possible  Cap¬ 
tain  Smith  (the  rest  of  the  council  seeming 
paralyzed  by  the  catastrophe)  got  the  men  at 
work  to  rebuild  the  houses  and  palisade.  Chop¬ 
ping  was  new  and  at  first  very  severe  work 
for  Ralph,  but  he  was  wise  enough  not  to  over¬ 
work  till  he  was  somewhat  inured  to  the  toil. 
His  hands  soon  became  so  stiff  and  blistered 
that  each  morning  when  he  grasped  his  ax- 
handle  anew  it  seemed  that  the  torture  was 
more  than  he  could  bear.  There  were  two 
young  gallants  of  the  “  first  supply/’  whose 
jeweled  fingers  had  never  held  anything 
rougher  than  a  bridle-rein  and  were  much 
more  dexterous  with  cards  than  with  any  use¬ 
ful  tool.  Almost  every  blow  these  fellows 
dealt  with  their  smarting  hands  was  accompan¬ 
ied  with  an  oath.  Captain  Smith,  although 
bred  in  camps,  being  a  man  who  had  religion 
much  at  heart,  was  much  offended  at  this  pro¬ 
fanity,  and  at  last  told  the  offenders  that  for 


28 


ARISTOPIA. 


every  oath  they  should  have  a  can  of  cold 
water  poured  down  their  sleeves.  He  carried 
out  his  threat,  or  at  least  a  part  of  it,  and  the 
two  gallants  swore  no  more  above  their  breath. 
In  a  few  weeks,  such  was  their  spirit,  they  be¬ 
came  pretty  fair  woodsmen,  and  loved  almost 
as  much  to  make  the  tall  trees  come  thundering 
down  as  in  England  they  had  loved  to  ride  to 
the  death  of  the  fox.  But  there  were  few  of 
their  spirit  among  that  band.  Ralph  was  in¬ 
dustrious  and  determined,  but  he  had  not  the 
high  and  reckless  spirit  of  the  two  gallants. 

At  first  the  shelterless  men  suffered  much 
at  night  from  the  cold.  Ralph  and  a  chosen 
comrade,  out  of  work  hours,  soon  constructed  a 
shelter  of  brush,  and  provided  a  good  bed  of 
leaves  gathered  in  the  woods.  They  had  to 
watch  closely  to  keep  their  blankets  from  being 
stolen. 

Toward  spring  a  bed  of  sand  heavily  charged 
with  powdered  iron  pyrites  was  discovered 
near  the  village.  The  glittering  stuff  was 
supposed  to  be  gold,  and  immediately  the  little 
colony  went  wild.  Fortunately  their  cabins 
had  been  rebuilt  or  they  would  have  neglected 
that  necessary  task  to  gather  gold.  There 
were  three  or  four  of  the  “  first  supply’’  who 


AR I  STOP  I  A. 


29 


had  come  out  as  refiners,  and  these  were  the 
craziest  of  the  lot.  There  was  no  talk  but  of 
digging  gold,  washing  gold,  refining  gold,  and 
loading  gold.  There  were  only  two  men  in 
the  community  whose  heads  were  not  turned. 
They  were  Smith  and  Morton.  The  latter  had 
learned  something  about  minerals,  and  pro¬ 
nounced  the  stuff  sulphuret  of  iron,  much  to 
the  disgust  of  the  self-styled  refiners. 

Captain  John  Martin,  one  of  the  council, 
was  the  discoverer  of  the  “  mine,”  and  the 
leader  of  the  gold-liunters.  One  day  Smith 
broke  out  upon  him  : 

66 1  tell  you,  man,  I  am  tormented  as  never 
before  to  see  all  necessary  business  neglected 
to  load  your  crazy  ship  with  this  gilded  dirt. 
I  applaud  not  your  golden  inventions  ;  not  be¬ 
cause  you  do  not  admit  me  to  a  sight  of  your 
trials  and  golden  consultations, — you  and  these 
loud-mouthed  refiners,  who  I  doubt  ever  re¬ 
fined  anything, — but  because  in  all  this  time 
they  have  not  been  able  to  show  me  a  more 
substantial  token,  and  turn  out  something 
which  looks  as  if  it  might  make  a  sovereign  or 
a  golden  ring,  instead  of  mere  dross.  I  am 
not  enamored  of  such  dirty  skill.” 

At  last  the  ship  was  laden  with  the  glitter- 


30 


ARISTOPIA. 


ing  dust,  and  fourteen  weeks  after  her  arrival 
she  departed.  With  her  departed  two  of  the 
council,  Wingfield  and  Archer,  who  had  arro¬ 
gated  to  themselves  a  number  of  pompous 
titles,  but  were  despised  by  the  colonists,  who 
gladly  saw  them  go. 

Through  Newport’s  sloth,  the  ship  had  lain 
so  long  that  her  crew  had  eaten  up  a  large  part 
of  what  was  intended  for  the  colonists.  Smith 
had  been  a  careful  trader  with  the  Indians,  but 
Newport  was  a  reckless  prodigal,  and  loaded 
them  with  gifts  until  they  scorned  to  give  any¬ 
thing  in  trade.  But  before  this  the  sailors 
and  soldiers  had  been  allowed  to  trade  freely 
with  the  Indians,  and  they  embezzled  much  of 
the  stores  in  illicit  traffic.  Some  favorite  of 
the  company  had  set  up  a  tavern  for  the  sale 
of  victuals  and  drink,  and,  as  one  colonist 
wrote  home :  “  Those  that  had  either  money, 
spare  clothes,  or  credit  to  give  bills  of  pai- 
ment,  gold  rings,  furrs,  or  any  such  commodi¬ 
ties  were  ever  welcome  to  this  removing  tav¬ 
ern,  and  we  might  buy  our  owne  provisions  at 
15  times  the  value.”  This  tavern  seems  to 
have  much  resembled  the  sutler  tent  of  a 
modern  army. 

Smith  and  Scrivener  did  their  best,  but  the 


Alt  I  ST  OP  I  A. 


31 


majority  of  the  council  seemed  possessed  by  the 
demon  of  folly,  and  overruled  all  wise  counsels. 
Through  exposure  while  houseless,  but  much 
more  through  their  folly  and  recklessness, 
nearly  half  of  the  colonists  died  between  the 
arrival  of  the  Sea  Gull  and  that  of  the  Phoenix. 

Ralph  Morton,  by  his  prudent  care  of  him¬ 
self,  kept  in  good  health.  The  colonists  were 
made  to  labor  on  the  public  works  only  six 
hours  a  day,  and  Ralph  soon  became  inured  to 
this.  Much  of  his  spare  time  was  spent  in 
learning  the  language  of  the  Powhatans.  He 
first  learned  what  he  could  from  Captain  Smith, 
and  especially  that  key  to  learning  of  those 
who  understand  nothing  of  the  learner’s  lan¬ 
guage,  the  question,  “  What  do  you  call 
this?”  in  the  Powhatan  language,  “Kakatora- 
wines  yowo?”  Then  he  took  for  his  teacher 
an  Indian  boy  whom  Powhatan  had  given  as 
hostage  to  Newport  on  the  latter’s  visit  to 
Werowocomoco.  This  boy’s  name  was  Na- 
montack,  and  he  was  a  shrewd  and  intelligent 
fellow. 

The  colonists  succeeded  in  getting  about 
thirty  acres  cleared  and  planted  in  good  season 
with  Indian  corn.  Near  the  end  of  corn¬ 
planting  the  Phoenix  arrived,  bringing  about 


32 


ARISTOPIA. 


fifty  new  immigrants.  When  she  had  parted 
eompany  with  her  consort  off  the  capes  she  had 
been  blown  far  southward  and  had  put  into  a 
port  of  the  West  Indies  for  repairs.  Being  in 
bad  condition,  these  repairs  took  considerable 
time,  but  she  reached  Jamestown  without  the 
loss  of  a  man.  Her  arrival  cheered  the  unfor¬ 
tunate  colony  considerably.  Captain  Martin 
desired  to  lade  this  ship  with  his  supposed 
gold,  but  Smith  prevailed  and  had  her  loaded 
with  cedar. 


ABISTOPIA. 


33 


CHAPTER  IV. 

On  the  second  of  June,  1608,  the  Phoenix 
left  Jamestown  for  England,  taking  with  her 
John  Smith  and  a  party  of  fourteen  men 
(among  them  Ralph  Morton),  who  went  to  ex¬ 
plore  the  Chesapeake  by  order  of  the  Company, 
who  hoped  to  find  a  passage  to  the  South 
Sea. 

At  the  capes  of  the  Chesapeake  Captain 
Smith’s  party  left  the  Phoenix  and  set  out  on 
their  voyage  in  an  open  barge  of  three  tons, 
rigged  with  a  mast  and  sail.  They  sailed  up 
the  eastern  side  of  the  bay,  first  visiting  the 
Indian  village  of  Accomac,  where  they  were 
very  kindly  treated.  While  exploring  some 
little  islands  in  the  bay  they  were  caught  in  a 
violent  storm  of  thunder  and  lightning,  with 
such  gusts  of  wind  that  they  were  well-nigh 
shipwrecked. 

Returning  to  the  eastern  shore  of  the  bay, 

they  put  into  a  little  river  called  Wighcocomoco 

to  obtain  fresh  water.  As  they  came  near  the 
3 


34 


A1UST0PIA. 


shore  the  savages  gathered  on  the  banks  with 
demonstrations  of  furious  hostility,  hut  in  a 
little  while  became  very  friendly.  The  water 
found  there  was  muddy,  warm,  and  brackish, 
and  far  from  refreshing.  However,  the  party 
filled  their  water-vessels  with  it  and  set  off  to 
visit  some  small  islands  in  the  bay. 

Again  a  violent  storm  burst  upon  them  with 
such  a  gust  of  wind  that  their  sail  was  rent 
and  their  mast  carried  overboard.  Managing 
with  difficulty  to  land  on  one  of  the  little 
islands,  hardly  more  than  a  mud  bank,  they 
were  forced  by  a  remarkable  succession  of 
storms  to  remain  two  days.  Smith  called  the 
little  group  of  islands  “  Limbo,”  as  being 
something  between  purgatory  and  the  infernal 
regions.  Such  a  name  applied  by  an  old  cam¬ 
paigner  inured  to  all  hardships  is  very  suggest¬ 
ive  of  what  the  party  endured  during  those 
two  days.  They  utilized  the  time  to  some  ex¬ 
tent  by  patching  up  their  sail  with  such  parts 
of  their  shirts  as  they  could  spare  with  least 
inconvenience. 

Sailing  back  to  the  mainland  on  the  eastern 
shore  of  the  bay,  the  party  entered  the  little 
river  Cuskarawaok.  There  they  found  the 
natives  so  persistently  hostile  that  Captain 


ARISTOPIA. 


35 


Smith  ordered  his  men  to  give  them  a  volley. 
Some  of  the  savages  were  apparently  wounded, 
and  their  consternation  was  great.  They 
tumbled  into  the  grass  and  wriggled  away  like 
snakes. 

Going  ashore,  Captain  Smith  and  his  party 
entered  some  of  the  houses  of  the  natives  and 
left  there  some  small  pieces  of  copper,  some 
beads,  and  two  or  three  little  bells.  This  com¬ 
bination  of  bullets  and  presents  seemed  to  have 
a  mollifying  effect  on  the  savages,  as  the  next 
day  they  were  very  friendly,  crowding  around 
Smith  and  his  men,  and  offering  them  all  sorts 
of  services.  All  the  Indians  encountered  on 
this  voyage  told  the  whites  about  the  Massa- 
womeks,  a  fierce  and  powerful  tribe  who  dwelt 
beyond  the  mountains  to  the  west,  but  made 
numerous  forays  upon  the  Indians  of  the  tide¬ 
water  region,  carrying  off  many  women  as  cap¬ 
tives.  They  importuned  Smith  to  assist  them 
in  driving  off  the  Massawomeks,  and  Smith 
promised  to  do  so  after  he  had  attended  to 
some  other  matters.  The  natives  of  the  low 
country  about  the  .Wighcocomoco  were  small 
and  low  of  stature. 

The  water  was  so  poor  on  the  eastern  side 
of  the  bay  that  Captain  Smith  determined  to 


36 


ARISTOPIA. 


cross  over  to  the  western  side,  the  bold  shores 
of  which  could  be  dimly  seen  through  the  haze 
of  distance,  low  upon  the  horizon.  They 
found  the  western  shore  rough  and  barren,  but 
with  plenty  of  good  water.  Sailing  up  this 
shore,  they  came  to  a  broad  estuary,  the  mouth 
of  a  navigable  river,  which  Smith  called  the 
Bolus,  from  the  resemblance  of  the  earth  on 
its  banks  to  a  drug*  then  in  use  for  making*  a 

o  o 

bolus.  This  river  was  afterward  called  the 
Pat  ap  sco. 

The  explorers  were  detained  here  three  days 
by  bad  weather  and  strong  north  winds.  Their 
bread  had  been  wet  during  storms  they  had 
encountered,  when  their  boat  was  at  times 
nearly  tilled  with  water.  They  had  no  luck  in 
killing  game,  and  had  neglected  to  bring  along 
any  kind  of  apparatus  for  catching  fish.  The 
bad  and  scanty  food  and  the  exposure  to  the 
storms  in  their  little  open  boat  caused  several 
of  the  men  to  fall  sick.  Nearly  all  of  them 
importuned  Captain  Smith  to  return  to  James¬ 
town.  Ralph  Morton,  still  well,  cheerful,  and 
courageous,  was  almost  alone  in  sustaining  the 
captain  in  the  resolution  to  push  on  and  com¬ 
plete  their  explorations  of  the  bay.  Smith 
strongly  objected  to  returning.  He  reminded 


ARISTOPIA. 


37 


his  men  how  the  company  of  Ralph  Lane,  in 
their  explorations  of  the  Roanoke  River,  had 
urged  their  leader  to  go  forward,  saying  that 
they  had  still  a  dog,  which,  boiled  with  sassa¬ 
fras  leaves  for  sauce,  would  richly  feed  them 
until  they  could  finish  their  journey,  although 
they  had  not  a  mouthful  of  bread. 

“  But  we  have  no  dog,”  said  one  of  the  men. 

“But  we  have  plenty  of  bread,”  returned 
the  Captain,  “  albeit  somewhat  mouldy.  I 
charge  you,  gentlemen,  to  remember  that,  in 
setting  out,  you  were  suspicious  of  my  tender¬ 
ness,  thinking  I  would  be  for  turning  back, 
while  you  would  be  all  for  going  on.  I  have 
shared  with  you  the  worst  thus  far.  It  is  un¬ 
likely  worse  is  to  come.  This  is  my  second 
summer  in  Virginia,  and  I  never  saw  such  a 
continuance  of  storms  as  we  have  weathered. 
You  may  expect  a  long  period  of  fair  weather 
now.  For  what  is  to  come,  whether  it  be 
weather,  or  diet,  or  whatsoever,  I  am  contented 
to  take  the  worst.  Do  you  lack  shelter  at 
night  ?  Take  my  blanket.  Is  the  bread  bad  ? 
Take  the  best  and  leave  the  mouldiest  for  me. 
As  for  your  fears  that  I  will  lose  myself  in 
these  great,  unknown  waters,  or  that  we  shall 
be  swallowed  in  some  stormy  gust,  abandon 


38 


ARISTOPIA. 


them ;  they  are  childish.  I  have  found  and 
fought  my  way  through  the  wildernesses  of  all 
four  quarters  of  the  globe,  and  am  now  hale 
and  sound.  It  would  be  a  shame  for  you  to 
force  me  to  return  now,  when  we  are  scarce  able 
to  say  where  we  have  been,  and  have  not  yet 
heard  of  that  we  were  sent  to  seek.  Regain, 
therefore,  your  old  spirits  with  which  you  set 
out,  for  return  I  will  not  until  I  have  seen  the 
Massawomeks,  found  Patawomek,  or  the  head 
of  this  water  which  you  conceit  to  be  endless.” 

But  the  pitiful  complaints  of  the  sick  men 
finally  prevailed  on  Smith  to  turn  the  head  of 
the  barge  southward  when  they  left  Bolus 
harbor.  At  their  first  landing  to  pass  the 
night  they  killed  a  deer,  which  greatly  bet¬ 
tered  their  fare  and  revived  their  spirits.  The 
weather  was  now  very  pleasant. 

Proceeding  southward,  the  party  soon  came 
to  the  mouth  of  a  river  or  estuary,  seven  miles 
broad,  which  the  Indians  called  Patawomek. 
By  this  time  the  sick  men  were  better  and  the 
others  had  recovered  their  spirits  and  were 
willing  to  explore  this  great  river,  so  they 
sailed  up  it  for  days,  finding  no  current  to 
impede  them.  They  found  the  Indians  on  its 
banks  uniformly  friendly.  Though  not  of 


ARISTOPIA. 


39 


the  tribe  of  Powhatan,  they  had  been  sub¬ 
jugated  by  that  chief.  Their  native  language 
was  not  the  Powhatan  language,  but  as  in 
every  village  were  persons  who  in  their  youth 
had  lived  as  hostages  with  the  great  chief  and 
learned  the  language  of  his  tribe,  Smith  and 
Morton  easily  communicated  with  them. 

At  last,  after  passing  a  considerable  branch 
coming  in  on  the  northeastern  side,  they 
found  the  river  quite  narrow,  and  soon  came  to 
some  rapids  over  which  they  could  not  get 
their  barge.  Passing  the  night  at  the  mouth 
of  a  creek  about  a  mile  below  the  foot  of  the 
rapids  and  the  head  of  tidewater,  Smith  set 
out  on  foot  in  the  morning  with  eight  men  to 
explore  the  river  for  some  distance  above  the 
rapids.  Ralph  Morton  was  among  the  six  left 
with  the  boat.  Smith  instructed  them  not  to 
wander  away  from  the  boat.  However,  as 
Ralph  had  developed  considerable  skill  in 
marksmanship,  and  had  shown  himself  careful 
and  trustworthy,  Smith  gave  him  permission 
to  go  out  a  short  distance  for  a  hunt,  caution¬ 
ing  him  to  look  out  for  Indians. 

Ralph  shouldered  his  musket  and  strolled 
off  up  the  creek,  with  eyes  and  ears  alert  for 
game  or  Indians.  He  was  strong  and  nimble 


40 


AEISTOPIA. 


of  foot,  and  he  went  much  farther  than  he  in¬ 
tended.  As  he  ascended  the  creek  the  region 
became  picturesquely  hilly,  and  in  some  places 
cliffs  of  dark  rock  towered  up  far  above  the 
rippling  waters.  He  saw  no  game  worth 
shooting  at  within  good  range.  At  last  he 
heard  the  cry  of  a  wild  turkey-gobbler  (which 
he  had  learned  to  distinguish)  up  on  the  hill 
away  from  the  creek.  Cautiously  going  to¬ 
ward  the  sound,  he  soon  came  in  sight  of  a 
fine  gobbler,  strutting  up  and  down  a  fallen 
log  in  a  little  open  space  within  fair  range. 
Ralph  took  careful  aim  and  fired,  putting  a 
hall  through  the  base  of  the  turkey’s  neck. 

Picking  up  his  game,  he  turned  back  toward 
the  creek,  but  as  he  was  rather  tired  he  con¬ 
cluded  to  rest  a  little,  and  sat  down  on  a  dike 
of  quartz  which  barely  projected  above  the  thin 
soil.  The  sun  was  getting  high,  and  a  beam 
came  down  through  a  rift  in  the  foliage  high 
above,  falling  upon  the  dike  near  Ralph.  He 
gazed  idly  at  the  bright  spot  on  the  ground. 
At  last  he  became  aware  of  a  tiny  sparkle 
between  the  white  fragments  of  quartz.  He 
soon  became  curious  about  it,  and  on  examina¬ 
tion  found  it  came  from  a  scratch  on  a  lump 
of  something  the  upper  surface  of  which  was 


A  BIST  OP  I  A. 


41 


visible  above  the  earth.  With  the  point  of 
his  knife  he  pried  out  the  lump,  which  was  of 
the  bulk  of  an  orange,  but  of  irregular  shape. 
Ralph  was  surprised  at  its  weight.  He 
scratched  it  with  his  knife.  There  was  no 
further  doubt.  Its  luster  and  weight  pro¬ 
claimed  it  solid  gold.  For  a  few  moments 
Ralph  was  almost  stupefied  with  his  emotions. 
Then  he  fell  eagerly  at  work  scraping  away 
with  his  hands  and  the  blade  of  his  large 
sheath-knife  the  thin  earth  that  covered  the 
quartz  ledge.  In  doing  so  he  came  upon 
several  other  lumps  of  gold,  one  a  little  larger 
and  the  others  smaller  than  the  first  one.  He 
cut  a  stout  sapling,  and  sharpened  the  end  of 
the  stick  to  make  a  crowbar,  with  which  he 
pried  away  a  few  pieces  of  the  quartz,  which 
was  much  fissured.  After  a  while  he  exposed 
the  top  of  a  piece  of  gold  that  was  four  or  five 
inches  across,  but  it  was  immovable,  and  he 
could  not  tell  to  what  depth  it  extended. 

Being  very  weary,  he  stopped  work,  and  as 
he  rested  he  reflected.  His  first  impulse  was 
to  rush  away  and  inform  his  companions  of  his 
incredible  discovery.  But  after  a  while  he 
thought  he  would  keep  it  secret.  If  he  could 
form  some  scheme  to  get  control  of  all  this 


42 


ARISTOPIA. 


wealth,  how  much  more  good  he  could,  and  he 
thought  he  would,  do  with  it  than  would  that 
dissolute  and  worthless  crowd  at  Jamestown, 
or  that  company  of  selfish  merchants  in  London. 
He  found  that  the  lumps  he  had  already  procured 
weighed  fifteen  pounds  or  more,  and  he  re¬ 
flected  that  such  an  amount  was  about  all  he 
could  carry  with  him  and  keep  concealed  on 
his  person,  and  even  that  amount  would  be  very 
burdensome.  He  quickly  calculated  the  prob¬ 
able  value  of  fifteen  pounds  of  gold,  and  found 
it  was  enough,  if  he  could  get  back  to  England 
with  it,  to  charter  a  hark  and  come  over  and  get 
the  rest  of  the  gold,  however  much  there  might 
be. 

It  required  no  small  resolution  to  leave  that 
glittering  mass  of  untold  value  there  in  the 
earth  and  go  back  to  Jamestown,  but  at  last 
Ralph  carefully  replaced  the  loose  earth  upon 
the  golden  mass,  gathered  some  stones  and 
placed  over  it,  scraped  up  some  dead  leaves 
from  some  distance  away,  and  scattered  them 
over  the  rocks,  hoping  to  conceal  the  gold  from 
any  straggling  Indian  who  might  pass  the  spot. 
Then,  stowing  away  his  nuggets  in  his  clothes 
as  best  he  could,  he  set  out  on  his  return  to  the 
boat,  which  was  about  three  miles  away.  With  a 


A  RISTOPIA. 


43 


pocket  compass  lie  carefully  took  the  bearings 
of  his  mine  from  the  creek.  On  a  largre  tree 
near  the  bank  of  the  creek  he  cut  some  marks 
and  took  some  mental  notes  of  the  surround¬ 
ings,  which  he  reduced  to  writing  at  the  first 
opportunity. 

He  did  not  care  to  look  for  game,  but  when 
within  about  half  a  mile  of  the  boat  another 
turkey  offered  so  fair  a  mark  that  he  shot  it. 
Tying  the  necks  of  the  two  birds  together,  he 
slung  them  over  his  shoulder  and  was  soon 
among  his  companions,  who  were  becoming  un¬ 
easy  at  his  long  absence.  Having  some  needles 
and  thread  with  him,  with  a  strip  of  tanned 
deerskin  which  he  had  procured  from  the  In¬ 
dians  he  made  him  a  belt  with  pockets  to  con¬ 
tain  his  gold.  As  soon  as  he  could  do  so  with¬ 
out  being  observed,  he  put  his  gold  in  the  belt 
and  fastened  it  about  his  waist  under  his 
clothes. 

Smith  and  his  companions  returned  toward 
evening  and  reported  that  above  the  rapids  the 
river  ran  through  a  rather  narrow  valley,  and 
was  in  some  places  skirted  by  high  cliffs,  and 
that  it  was  not  navigable.  In  that  region  there 
was  much  mica  in  the  rocks  and  earth,  in  small, 
glittering  particles.  It  looked  so  much  like 


44 


ABISTOPIA. 


silver  that  even  the  cautious  Smith  was  half 
deceived  and  had  gathered  some  of  it  to  send 
to  England  for  assay.  Morton  pronounced  it 
mica,  and  Smith  said  with  a  sigh  :  “  Well,  it 

may  be.  I  would  we  had  some  with  us  who 
knew  a  mine  from  spar.” 

As  the  tide  was  beginning  to  ebb,  the  party, 
to  take  advantage  of  it,  started  down  the  river 
that  evening.  Smith  saw  some  Indians  painted 
with  some  substance  which,  as  he  said,  “made 
them  look  like  blackamoors  dusted  over  with 
silver.”  They  told  him  where  they  got  it,  and 
he  went  to  find  the  “  mine.”  About  thirty 
miles  below  the  rapids  a  small  but  navigable 
river  which  the  Indians  called  the  Quijough 
empties  into  the  Patawomek.  The  party 
rowed  as  far  as  they  could  get  the  boat  up  this 
river.  Then  Smith  with  six  men  set  out  on 
foot,  leaving  Ralph  Morton  with  the  other  men 
in  charge  of  the  boat.  The  deposit  of  match- 
queon ,  as  the  Indians  called  the  mineral,  was 
seven  or  eight  miles  from  where  Smith  left  the 
boat.  In  due  time  he  returned  with  a  con¬ 
siderable  quantity  of  the  stuff,  which  he 
thought  was  antimony,  but  Ralph  believed  it  to 
be  plumbago. 

Proceeding  down  the  river  and  bay  to  the 


ABISTOPIA. 


45 


mouth  of  the  Rappahannock,  Smith  intended 
to  explore  that  river,  but  as  the  tide  ebbed, 
their  barge  grounded  on  a  bar.  While  wait¬ 
ing  for  the  tide  to  come  in,  Smith  amused  him¬ 
self  by  spearing  with  his  sword  the  fish  lying 
in  the  shallow  water  among  the  reeds.  He 
caught  many  fish,  among  them  a  stingaree, 
which  gave  him  a  wound  which  made  him  so 
extremely  sick  that  his  party  expected  him  to 
die.  In  a  few  hours  he  felt  better,  but  was  so 
far  from  well  that  he  concluded  to  goto  James¬ 
town.  The  party  arrived  there  on  the  21st  of 
July.  They  found  many  of  the  colonists  sick, 
and  as  their  chronicler  wrote :  “  All  unable 
to  doe  any  thing  but  complaine  of  the  pride 
and  unreasonable  needlesse  crueltie  of  the  silly 
President,  that  had  riotously  consumed  the 
store;  and  to  fullfill  his  follies  about  building 
him  an  unnecessary  pallace  for  his  pleasure 
in  the  woods  had  brought  them  all  to  that 
misery.” 


46 


ARISTOPIA. 


CHAPTER  V. 

Resting  at  Jamestown  only  two  days,  Smith 
set  out  in  his  barge  on  the  24th  of  July,  to 
finish  his  exploration.  He  took  a  party  of 
twelve  with  him,  the  majority  of  whom  had 
been  on  his  first  expedition.  Ralph  Morton 
disliked  either  to  leave  his  gold  in  Jamestown 
or  carry  it  on  his  person ;  hut  he  had  been  so 
useful  to  Captain  Smith  that  the  latter  was 
bent  on  having  him  of  the  company.  So 
Ralph  put  the  gold  in  his  chest,  which  was 
strong  and  well-locked,  and  left  it  in  charge  of 
the  young  man  he  had  chosen  for  his  comrade. 
As  no  ship  was  expected  in  for  several  weeks, 
he  knew  he  should  not,  by  going  with  Smith, 
miss  an  opportunity  of  returning  to  England. 

Descending  the  James  River,  the  party  was 
detained  two  or  three  days  at  Kecoughtan,  an 
Indian  village  near  the  mouth  of  the  river. 
After  dark  one  evening  Smith  fired  a  few 
rockets.  These  missiles,  rushing  on  their  fiery 
course  into  the  sky,  greatly  frightened  the 


ARISTOP1A. 


47 


savages,  who  supposed  the  whites  to  be  some 
sort  of  gods.  They  implored  Smith  to  destroy 
the  Massawomeks. 

The  explorers  sailed  directly  up  the  bay  until 
they  saw  it  divide.  They  explored  two  of  the 
branches  on  the  western  side  without  finding 
any  river  of  importance.  Then,  in  crossing, 
the  party  encountered  a  fleet  of  seven  or  eight 
canoes,  full  of  Indians,  who  appeared  to  he  pre¬ 
paring  for  fight.  An  epidemic  had  fallen  on 
the  explorers,  so  that  only  five  of  them  could 
stand.  The  others  lay  under  the  shade  of  the 
tarpaulin.  Smith  set  up  their  hats  on  sticks 
to  look  like  men.  He  then  fired  two  or  three 
muskets  so  that  the  bullets  went  skipping  over 
the  water  close  to  the  canoes.  The  noise  and 
the  long  range  of  the  bullets  frightened  the 
Indians,  who  pulled  their  canoes  in  to  the  shore 
with  all  speed.  They  landed  and  awaited  the 
approach  of  the  barge,  whose  great  size  seemed 
to  awe  them  somewhat.  Smith  made  signs 
of  friendship,  and  at  last  two  of  the  Indians 
ventured  to  come  on  board  the  barge.  Their 
fellows  followed  them  within  bow-shot,  to  assist 
them  at  need.  Each  of  the  two  ambassadors 
was  presented  with  a  bell.  They  then  returned 
and  brought  on  board  the  whole  Indian  party, 


48 


ARISTOPIA. 


who  gave  the  whites  venison,  bear-meat,  and 
fish,  in  return  for  a  few  beads. 

The  Indians  proved  to  be  the  renowned 
Massawomeks.  They  were  of  the  same  tribe 
which  the  French  called  the  Iroquois  and  the 
English  afterward  knew  in  New  York  as  the 
Five  Nations.  Although  esteemed  by  the 
other  Indian  tribes  as  so  bold  and  invincible 
that  they  “  made  war  with  all  the  world,”  they 
dared  not  encounter  the  English  muskets. 
Their  canoes  were  not  dugouts,  like  those  of 
the  tidewater  Indians,  but  were  made  of  birch- 
bark.  As  they  did  not  understand  the  Powha¬ 
tan  language,  the  communication  between  the 
two  parties  was  by  signs.  They  signified  that 
they  had  lately  attacked  the  Tockwoghes,  a 
tribe  living  in  that  neighborhood,  and  showed 
some  fresh  wounds  they  had  received. 

Smith  purchased  some  of  their  hows,  arrows, 
and  targets,  which  were  of  a  peculiar  pattern. 
Night  coming  on,  the  Massawomeks  retired 
to  camp,  and  the  whites  saw  them  no  more. 
They  were  evidently  not  fond  of  the  company 
of  such  mysterious  beings  as  the  whites  seemed 
to  be. 

Entering  the  river  Tockwogh,  the  explorers 
encountered  the  tribe  on  which  the  party  of 


ARISTOPIA. 


49 


Massawomeks  had  lately  made  an  attack.  One 
of  this  tribe  could  speak  the  language  of  Pow¬ 
hatan,  and  a  friendly  parley  ensued.  When 
the  Tockwoghes  saw  the  well-known  and 
dreaded  weapons  of  the  Massawomeks  in  the 
hands  of  the  English  they  supposed  the  weap¬ 
ons  had  been  captured  in  battle,  and  their 
admiration  of  the  whites  was  greatly  increased. 
They  welcomed  the  explorers  with  the  greatest 
hospitality.  Their  town  was  palisaded  with 
considerable  skill  as  a  defense  against  the  at¬ 
tacks  of  the  Massawomeks.  Smith  found 
among  these  Indians  some  articles  which  had 
evidently  come  from  the  French  traders  on  the 
St.  Lawrence,  having  passed  from  tribe  to  tribe 
in  exchange. 

Finding  the  mouth  of  the  Susquehanna,  the 
explorers  ascended  that  river  until  they  came 
to  a  place  where  the  stream,  although  very 
broad,  was  too  shallow  to  float  the  barge.  On 
this  river  the  explorers  found  a  tribe  of  Indians 
called  the  Susquehannocks,  whose  great  size 
astonished  Smith.  They  were  mild  and  friendly. 
They,  too,  had  suffered  much  from  the  forays 
of  the  Massawomeks. 

Sailing  down  the  bay  our  party  explored  the 

Patuxent  River  and  then  entered  the  Rappa- 
4 


50 


AB  IS  TOP  I A. 


hannock.  At  an  Indian  village  near  the 
mouth  of  the  latter  river  the  party  found  one 
who  seemed  to  them  like  an  old  friend :  an 
Indian  named  Mosco,  whom  they  had  first  en¬ 
countered  far  up  the  Patawomek,  and  who 
had  been  their  guide  to  the  mine  of  the  sub¬ 
stance  which  Smith  supposed  to  be  antimony. 
Learning  that  the  party  proposed  to  go  up  the 
Rappahannock,  Mosco  at  first  endeavored  to 
dissuade  them,  by  telling  them  of  the  fierce 
and  implacable  nature  of  the  Indians  far  up 
the  river,  hut  afterward  attached  himself  to  the 
party,  and  accompanied  them  on  all  their  ex¬ 
plorations  of  this  river.  He  was  quite  use¬ 
ful. 

The  explorers  found  that  the  Rappahannocks 
were  indeed  a  fierce  and  treacherous  tribe. 
Smith’s  party  had  several  fights  with  these 
savages.  The  latter  would  ambush  themselves 
on  the  margin  of  the  river  by  holding  before 
them  branches  of  trees  which  they  had  broken 
off.  In  one  of  these  encounters  Ralph  Mor¬ 
ton,  who  had  left  the  boat  and  gone  out  for  a 
parley,  received  a  severe  arrow-wound  in  the 
fleshy  part  of  the  right  arm. 

Leaving  the  Rappahannock,  the  party  went 
to  explore  the  south  end  of  the  Chesapeake. 


ARISTOPIA 


51 


While  they  were  out  on  the  broad  bay  at  night 
a  sudden  storm  arose,  and  the  barge  was 
driven  before  a  terrible  gale,  the  waves  sweep¬ 
ing  over  her,  and  the  crew  having  to  bail  with 
all  their  might  to  keep  from  foundering.  The 
frequent  flashes  of  lightning  illumined  the 
black  night,  and  by  this  light  they  were  finally 
enabled  to  run  into  shelter  at  Point  Comfort. 

The  next  day  the  indefatigable  Smith  set  off 
to  explore  the  little  bays  of  Nandsemond  and 
Norfolk.  This  done,  he  had  demonstrated  be¬ 
yond  a  doubt  that  there  was  no  passage  out  of 
the  Chesapeake  into  the  South  Sea,  which  pas¬ 
sage  the  London  Company  was  very  anxious  to 
have  found,  and  which  discovery  was  the  prin¬ 
cipal  object  of  all  these  explorations.  A  hos¬ 
tile  encounter  with  the  Nandsemond  Indians 
ended  in  the  two  parties  becoming  good 
friends,  and  Smith  loaded  his  barge  with  corn, 
obtained  from  the  Nandsemonds  by  barter,  and 
set  sail  for  Jamestown. 

Captain  Smith,  although  of  a  very  grave  and 
serious  disposition,  showed  his  love  of  a  practi¬ 
cal  joke  by  decking  out  the  barge  with  pieces 
of  colored  cloth  (brought  along  for  barter),  in 
imitation  of  Spanish  flags.  These  being  seen 
far  down  the  river,  the  colony  at  Jamestown 


52 


ARISTOPIA. 


supposed  that  a  Spanish  pirate  was  coming, 
and  were  greatly  frightened.  They  had  from 
the  first  settlement  feared  a  visit  from  the 
Spaniards. 

Thus  on  the  seventh  of  September  ended 
those  remarkable  explorations,  in  which  a  small 
party  had  made  voyages  aggregating  three 
thousand  miles,  in  an  open  boat,  in  an  un¬ 
usually  stormy  season,  exposed  without  shelter 
to  the  fierce  heat  of  the  midday  sun  and  the 
chill  of  the  rainy  night.  At  the  end  of  his 
voyages  Ralph  Morton,  at  twenty  years  of  age, 
felt  himself  a  veteran. 

During  both  of  these  voyages  Ralph  took 
observations  from  which  he  drew  a  map,  a  copy 
of  which  he  gave  to  Captain  Smith,  who  sent  it 
to  England.  Long  afterward  Smith  had  much 
credit  for  the  remarkable  accuracy  of  the  map, 
considering  the  circumstances  of  its  production. 

The  party,  on  reaching  Jamestown,  found 
the  colony  doing  somewhat  better  than  before 
under  the  presidency  of  Scrivener,  the  wretched 
Ratcliffe  having  been  deposed  and  imprisoned 
for  his  lawless  excesses.  On  the  tenth  of  Sep¬ 
tember  Smith  was  elected  president,  at  the 
request  of  the  Company,  and  things  mended 
still  more. 


ARISTOPIA. 


53 


About  this  time  Newport  arrived  from  Eng¬ 
land  with  orders  from  the  Company  not  to  re¬ 
turn  without  a  lump  of  gold,  the  discovery  of 
a  passage  to  the  South  Sea,  or  finding  one  of 
the  lost  company  sent  out  by  Walter  Raleigh, 
all  of  which  conditions  Captain  Smith  laughed 
to  scorn.  Newport  brought  a  boat,  built  in 
sections,  to  be  carried  around  the  falls  of  the 
James,  in  the  effort  to  discover  a  passage  to 
the  South  Sea.  He  spent  some  time  in  a  fruit¬ 
less  effort  to  explore  the  upper  James,  and  still 
more  in  an  expedition  for  the  silly  ceremony  of 
crowning;  Powhatan  as  a  vassal  king*  of  King 
James.  Smith,  railing  at  the  folly,  was  com¬ 
pelled  by  the  Company  to  assist  in  it.  New¬ 
port’s  evil  influence  was  again  felt  so  much 
that  Smith  was  eager  to  load  his  ship  and  pack 
him  off  to  England. 

Under  ordinary  circumstances  it  would  have 
been  impossible  for  Ralph  Morton  to  have  ob¬ 
tained  permission  to  go  to  England.  Most  of 
the  colony  would  have  gone  in  a  body  if  Smith 
had  allowed  them.  However,  Ralph’s  wound 
became  much  worse.  His  system  was  in  that 
condition  popularly  known  as  “  the  blood  out 
of  order,”  which  is  common  to  people  the  first 
year  of  their  residence  in  a  strange  climate. 


54 


ARISTOPIA. 


His  arm  was  much  swollen  and  inflamed,  but, 
though  it  had  an  alarming  look,  it  was  not 
very  painful,  and  he  made  more  ado  about  it 
than  was  necessary.  He  was  unable  to  work, 
and  spent  most  of  his  time  with  Namontock, 
learning  the  Powhatan  language,  of  which  he 
composed  a  vocabulary  and  grammar.  Being 
very  frugal  and  careful,  he  had  some  money 
left,  with  which  he  offered  to  pay  his  passage 
home,  saying  if  he  did  not  get  better  surgical 
treatment  for  his  wound  than  he  could  get  in 
Jamestown,  it  might  kill  him.  On  one  account 
Smith  was  willing  to  let  Ralph  go.  He  knew 
that  Ralph’s  brother-in-law  was  a  member  of 
the  Company  and  a  personal  friend  of  the 
Treasurer.  He  desired  to  send  a  letter  to  the 
Treasurer,  stating  plainly  the  bad  management 
of  the  colony.  He  meant  to  score  Newport 
severely,  and  so  he  did  not  wish  to  intrust 
Newport  with  the  letter.  Knowing  that  Ralph 
quite  agreed  with  him  in  his  opinion  of  the 
way  things  were  going,  he  resolved  to  make 
the  young  man  his  messenger. 

So  it  was  that  one  Indian-summer  day,  about 
eleven  months  after  Ralph  first  set  foot  in 
Jamestown,  he  left  it  forever,  with  his  little 
chest  and  its  precious  contents. 


ARIST0P1A. 


55 


That  winter  voyage  was  a  stormy  one,  al¬ 
though  not  a  very  long  one,  as  the  storms  came 
from  the  west.  On  the  tossing  ship,  amid  the 
howling  tempests,  the  young  adventurer  had 
no  fears.  His  fancy  saw  a  destiny  for  him  too 
great  to  be  swallowed  up  in  a  tempest.  Caesar 
said  to  the  frightened  boatman  in  the  storm  * 
“Quid  times?  Caesarem  vehis  et  fortunas 
suas.”  Ralph  Morton  could  say  with  equal 
confidence  that  the  little  ship  carried  greater 
fortunes  than  those  of  Caesar,  for  he  was  about 
to  influence  the  world’s  history  more  than  did 
Caesar.  And  it  is  doubtful  if  Caesar  did 
change  the  current  of  history  much  beyond  his 
lifetime.  Gaul  and  Britain  would  have  been 
conquered  without  him,  and  perhaps  at  the 
expense  of  the  same  lives  and  treasure  which 
he  squandered  in  his  struggle  with  Pompey, 
and  his  partisans  spent  in  their  struggle  with 
Brutus  and  Cassius. 


56 


AR1ST0P1A. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Arrived  in  London,  Ralph  quickly  dis¬ 
posed  of  his  gold  to  the  goldsmiths  for  about 
seven  hundred  and  fifty  pounds  sterling.  He 
then  sought  and  found  a  vessel  which  he  could 
charter  for  a  voyage,  a  small  bark  of  thirty 
tons,  whose  captain  and  owner  was  ready  for  a 
venture.  When  Ralph  told  him  he  wanted  to 
go  to  Virginia  for  a  cargo  of  sassafras  wood 
and  furs,  the  captain  honestly  advised  him 
to  get  a  larger  vessel,  as  his  little  bark  could 
not  carry  wood  enough  for  a  profitable  voyage. 
But  Ralph  could  not  afford  to  hire,  and  did 
not  need,  a  large  vessel.  The  captain  agreed  to 
furnish  the  crew  and  make  the  voyage  for 
three  hundred  pounds,  provided  he  should 
make  it  in  four  months,  which  he  was  sure  he 
could  do  with  fair  winds,  as  he  knew  the  u  short 
route.”  He  wanted  seventy-five  pounds  a  month 
added  for  every  month  of  the  voyage  beyond 
four,  but  Ralph  feared  if  he  made  such  a  bargain 
the  captain  would  purposely  prolong  the  voyage* 


ARISTOPIA. 


57 


Finally  the  captain  agreed  to  make  the  trip  for 
three  hundred  and  fifty  pounds,  two  hundred 
to  be  paid  in  advance  for  furnishing  the  ves¬ 
sel.  Considering  the  great  value  of  money  at 
that  time,  when  the  ordinary  wages  of  a  sea¬ 
man  was  eightpence  a  day,  and  everything 
else  in  proportion,  Captain  Nelson  did  not 
make  a  bad  bargain. 

As  before  said,  Ralph’s  brother-in-law,  John 
Somers,  was  a  personal  acquaintance  of  the 
Treasurer  of  the  Virginia  Company,  as  well  as 
a  member  of  the  Company,  and  through  his 
influence  Ralph  readily  got  a  license  to  make  a 
voyage  to  Virginia  to  trade,  on  condition  of 
giving  two  and  a  half  per  cent,  of  the  value  of 
his  cargo  to  the  Company. 

Ralph’s  next  oldest  brother,  Henry,  had  been 
a  soldier  since  the  age  of  eighteen,  at  first  in 
the  war  between  England  and  Spain,  and  after¬ 
wards  fighting  for  the  Dutch  against  the  Span¬ 
iards  in  Flanders.  He  was  now  at  home,  and 
Ralph  engaged  him  to  make  the  voyage  to 
Virginia.  Ralph’s  brother  next  younger  than 
himself,  Charles,  was  now  nineteen.  Ralph 
engaged  him,  also,  promising  to  pay  him  well, 
although  Charles  would  have  been  glad  to  go 
to  America  without  promise  of  pay. 


58 


ARISTOPIA. 


Captain  Nelson  furnished  his  bark  himself. 
Ralph,  besides  his  private  provisions  and  out¬ 
fit,  laid  in  a  stock  to  traffic  with  the  Indians  : 
small  mirrors,  small,  cheap  pocket-knives,  glass 
beads,  red  cloth,  sheets  of  polished  brass  and 
copper  which  he  cut  in  small  pieces,  fish-hooks, 
etc.  So  energetically  did  he  work  that  by  the 
twentieth  of  March,  1609,  the  bark  was  ready 
to  sail.  Dropping  down  to  the  mouth  of  the 
Thames,  they  waited  there  a  few  days  for  a  fair 
wind,  Ralph  fortunately  being  able  to  spend 
the  time  at  his  home. 

The  voyage  out  was  a  good  one.  Captain 
Nelson  knew  his  business,  and  the  winds  were 
not  contrary,  so  that  in  forty-eight  days  after 
leaving  the  Straits  of  Dover  our  adventurers 
passed  between  the  Capes  of  the  Chesapeake. 

Entering  the  Patawomek  (afterwards  known 
as  the  Potomac,  which  name  we  shall  hereafter 
use),  Ralph  stopped  at  the  several  Indian 
villages,  bought  what  furs  and  skins  the 
Indians  had,  and  told  them  he  would  be  back 
in  ten  or  twelve  days,  and  would  take  all  they 
could  provide  by  that  time.  The  last  village  to 
be  passed  on  the  river  was  that  of  the  Nacotch- 
tanks,  about  ten  miles  below  the  mouth  of  the 
creek  on  which  was  the  gold  mine.  Ralph 


ABI STOP  I  A. 


59 


particularly  wished  to  gain  the  friendship  of 
these  Indians  and  impress  them  with  his  power. 
So,  after  trading  with  them,  he  gave  their  chief 
some  particularly  fine  ornaments  (in  the  chief’s 
opinion)  as  presents.  On  the  vessel  was  a  small 
cannon.  This  was  carefully  aimed  at  a  tree 
near  by  on  the  river  bank  and  discharged.  At 
the  thunderous  sound  the  Indians,  who  were 
gathered  on  the  bank,  fell  upon  their  faces,  and 
it  took  several  minutes  to  persuade  them  that 
they  were  neither  hurt  nor  going  to  be  hurt. 
When  they  saw  how  the  cannon-ball  had  shat¬ 
tered  the  tree  like  a  thunderbolt,  they  were 
little  less  astonished  than  at  the  sound.  Ralph 
felt  confident  that  the  Nacotchtanks  would  not 
molest  him. 

Leaving  this  village,  before  night  the  vessel 
anchored  in  the  mouth  of  the  creek,  which 
Ralph,  in  memory  of  the  cliffs  he  had  seen 
along  it,  named  Rock  Creek.  That  night  he 
hid  in  the  bushes  a  small  shovel  and  a  pick. 
The  next  morning  he  gave  directions  to  the 
captain  to  set  the  crew  at  work  cutting  such 
sassafras  trees  as  grew  near  the  river  or  creek 
for  loading  the  bark.  By  the  help  of  small 
boats  the  timber  could  be  floated  on  the  river 
or  creek  to  the  side  of  the  vessel  for  load- 


60 


ABISTOPIA. 


ing.  He  had  brought  along  a  stout  ass,  which 
he  told  Captain  Nelson  could  be  used  that  day 
in  dragging  the  wood  to  the  water’s  edge.  By 
the  way,  sassafras  wood  was  then  in  great 
demand  in  England  for  cabinet-making. 

In  good  season  in  the  morning  Ralph  set  out 
for  his  mine,  leaving  his  brothers  to  assist  in 
loading  the  vessel.  He  was  armed  with  his 
musket,  sword,  and  pistols.  He  carried  the 
pick  and  shovel  before-mentioned,  and  in  a 
large  leather  pouch,  slung  over  his  shoulder 
with  a  stout  strap,  he  carried,  among  other 
things,  a  small  sledge  and  two  gads  or  steel 
wedges  with  which  miners  split  rock. 

He  found  the  place  he  sought  with  little 
difficulty.  It  had  not  been  molested.  After  a 
short  rest,  for  his  journey  and  his  burden  had 
tired  him,  he  set  to  work.  With  the  shovel  he 
removed  the  dirt  from  the  ledge  for  a  space  of 
five  or  six  feet  square,  and  put  it  carefully  in  a 
pile.  Then  with  his  pick  and  gads  he  attacked 
the  quartz  dike  that  surrounded  the  gold.  The 
quartz  was  much  cracked  and  fissured,  and  its 
removal  was  not  difficult.  He  soon  uncovered 
three  masses  of  gold  five  or  six  inches  thick, 
and  eight  or  nine  inches  in  length  horizontally. 
They  were  shaped  like  human  heads.  Digging 


ARISTOPIA. 


61 


-down  a  foot  or  more  lie  found  that  the  three 
masses  were  attached  below  by  necks  to  one 
still  larger  mass.  These  heads  were  separated 
from  each  other  by  a  few  inches  of  broken 
quartz.  He  also  found  another  lump  of  about 
twenty-five  pounds’  weight  attached  by  a  slender 
neck  to  the  mass.  This  neck  he  cut  through 
with  his  knife  and  a  gad,  and  put  the  lump  in 
his  pouch.  He  also  found  a  number  of  detached 
lumps,  varying  in  size  from  a  pigeon’s  egg  to 
an  orange. 

At  noon  he  built  a  little  fire  at  which  he 
broiled  some  meat,  and  made  a  dinner  of  meat 
and  bread  he  had  brought  in  his  pouch. 

By  careful  measurements  and  calculations  he 
determined  that  he  would  have  to  cut  each  of 
the  three  masses  or  heads  in  two  before  he 
could  handle  them  alone.  He  must  work  alone, 
for  he  concluded  to  keep  the  mine  a  secret, 
even  from  his  brothers,  for  a  time.  At  first  he 
had  thought  of  sharing  the  mine  with  them, 
but  as  the  possible  vastness  of  the  wealth 
occurred  to  him,  certain  vague  plans  began  to 
outline  themselves  in  his  mind — plans  for 
changing  the  face  of  a  considerable  part  of  the 
world — plans  in  which  he  wanted  no  equal 


62 


ABISTOPIA. 


partners,  for  he  knew  not  how  far  he  could 
trust  even  his  brothers. 

When  the  evening  sun  was  about  two  hours 
high,  Ralph  hid  the  small  pieces  of  gold  and 
his  gads  under  the  stones,  and  his  pick,  shovel, 
and  sledge  in  the  creek,  and  started  for  the 
vessel.  That  large  lump  of  gold  was  all  he 
wanted  to  carry  over  that  rough  path. 

The  next  morning  he  took  the  ass  with  him, 
provided  with  a  pack-saddle.  He  also  took  a 
box,  a  short  saw,  a  thin,  flat  chisel,  and  a  small 
crowbar.  Arriving  at  the  mine,  he  set  to 
work  with  the  saw  to  split  one  of  the  heads 
perpendicularly.  He  placed  a  cloth  so  as  to 
catch  the  sawdust  and  save  it.  When  he  had 
cut  down  to  the  smallest  part  of  the  neck  he 
cut  one-half  of  the  head  loose  with  the  chisel 
and  sledge.  Then  he  brought  forth  the  box. 
He  knew  that  if  he  filled  a  box  with  gold  the 
extraordinary  weight  would  betray  the  nature 
of  the  contents.  So  he  had  made  a  number  of 
strong  boxes  about  two  feet  long,  one  foot 
wide,  and  six  inches  deep,  each  with  three  com¬ 
partments,  the  middle  one  about  six  inches 
wide.  Into  the  middle  compartment  he  placed 
the  great  mass  of  gold  and  blocked  it  around 
tightly  with  pieces  of  wood.  Each  of  the  three 


ARISTOPIA. 


63 


compartments  was  provided  with  a  false  floor 
about  an  inch  from  the  top.  This  little  space 
Ralph  intended  to  fill  with  the  micaceous  earth 
so  that  he  could  open  the  box  and  allow  any¬ 
one  to  inspect  it  and  find  it  apparently  filled 
with  the  earth. 

Ralph  was  young  and  strong,  but  he  found  it 
a  hard  lift  to  place  the  box  with  the  gold  on 
the  ass.  This  done,  he  tied  the  box  firmly  to 
the  pack-saddle,  put  in  his  pouch  the  little 
lumps  of  gold  he  had  found  the  day  before, 
and  started  for  the  vessel.  Altogether,  it  was 
the  hardest  day’s  work  he  ever  did  in  his  life. 

In  the  three  succeeding  days  he  finished  split¬ 
ting  the  other  two  masses  or  heads  and  cutting 
them  loose  from  the  underlying  mass,  bringing 
home  a  piece  with  him  each  day.  By  weighing 
them  in  his  room  in  the  bark,  he  found  that 
the  six  large  pieces  and  the  several  smaller 
ones  would  aggregate  a  weight  of  more  than 
one  thousand  pounds  avoirdupois.  This  Ralph 
concluded  was  quite  sufficient  for  that  trip,  and 
as  it  would  require  great  labor  to  cut  any 
more  pieces  from  the  underlying  mass,  he 
determined  to  let  it  alone.  So  at  the  end  of 
the  fourth  day  he  put  back  into  the  hole  the  rock 
he  had  removed,  spread  the  dirt  over  it,  and 


64 


ARISTOPIA. 


covered  the  whole  with  dead  leaves.  The 
■fifth  day  he  made  two  trips  and  brought  in  the 
remaining  two  pieces.  The  tools  he  hid  in  the 
mud  of  the  creek. 

The  next  day  he  collected  a  sufficient  quan¬ 
tity  of  micaceous  earth  and  prepared  his  boxes 
for  inspection.  That  all  this  time  he  had 
been  hunting  for  gold  he  did  not  conceal 
from  Captain  Nelson  and  his  brothers,  hut  he 
did  not  announce  having  found  any. 

While  at  work  alone  lie  was  naturally  consider¬ 
ably  apprehensive  on  account  of  Indians,  partly 
because  he  feared  to  have  the  Indians  discover 
his  mine,  and  partly  from  a  natural  fear  of 
an  encounter  with  the  savages.  But  he  re¬ 
membered  how,  when  Captain  Smith  was  cap¬ 
tured  he  had  kept  at  bay  two  hundred  savages 
until  he  had  mired  and  was  unable  to  fight  (at 
least,  Captain  Smith  said  he  did,  and  there  was 
no  one  to  dispute  him),  and  Ralph  felt  con¬ 
fident  of  being  able  to  stand  off,  if  not  two 
hundred,  at  least  eighty,  which  he  knew  was 
about  the  fighting-strength  of  the  Nacotcli- 
tanks  and  greater  than  the  ordinary  number 
of  a  Massawomek  war-party.  He  was  in  little 
danger  from  the  latter,  for  they  always  came  in 
canoes,  and  did  not  wander  far  from  the  shore. 


A  RI  STOP  I  A. 


65 


After  Ralph  had  finished  getting  his  gold 
on  the  vessel,  he  remained  three  days 
longer,  for  appearance’s  sake,  to  allow  the 
vessel  to  be  loaded  with  sassafras  and  cedar 
wood.  Then  the  bark  dropped  down  the  river, 
stopping  at  each  Indian  village  to  trade  for 
peltries.  The  last  village  left  behind,  the 
vessel  bore  away  for  the  Capes,  and  Ralph 
heaved  a  sigh  of  relief  when  he  passed  be¬ 
tween  them  and  was  on  the  broad  ocean  and 
bound  for  England. 

The  voyage  home  was  uneventful,  the 
whole  expedition  being  made  in  very  little 

more  than  four  months. 

5 


Am  STOP  I  A. 


66 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Arrived  at  London,  Ralph  left  his  brothers 
to  dispose  of  the  cargo.  When  the  Company’s 
agent  came  on  board  to  inspect  the  cargo 
Ralph  opened  one  of  his  boxes  and  showed  the 
agent  the  glittering  earth.  The  Company  had 
received  some  such  earth  before  from  which 
the  most  skillful  metallurgists  they  could  find 
had  failed  to  extract  a  grain  of  precious  metal ; 
therefore,  when  Ralph  offered  the  agent  a 
sovereign  as  the  Company’s  probable  two  and 
one  half  per  cent  profit  on  the  contents  of  the 
six  boxes,  the  latter  took  the  coin  with  a  smile 
of  pity  for  the  deluded  young  man. 

Ralph  hired  a  house  in  London  and  had  a 
furnace  built  in  it,  in  which  to  melt  the  gold, 
with  crucibles  capable  of  containing  each  two 
hundred  pounds  avoirdupois,  and  cranes  with 
which  one  man  could  handle  a  crucible.  He 
procured  some  moulds  of  a  size  to  run  bars  of 
about  seven  hundred  troy  ounces  each.  On 
the  bottoms  of  the  molds  were  engraved  the 


ABISTOPIA. 


67 


words :  “  Casa  de  moneda  real.  Ciudad  de 
Megico  ”  (Royal  mint,  city  of  Mexico),  to 
make  it  appear  that  the  gold  came  from 
Mexico. 

Working  all  alone,  he  cast  the  gold  into 
bars,  some  of  which  he  sold  to  the  London 
goldsmiths  for  ready  money,  but  the  rest  he 
carried  over  to  Amsterdam  and  deposited  in 
the  new  bank  in  that  city,  there  being  at 
that  time  no  bank  in  London. 

As  soon  as  possible,  Ralph  went  to  the 
officers  of  the  Virginia  Company,  and  pro¬ 
posed  to  buy  of  them  a  grant  of  land,  to  be 
bounded  by  the  arc  of  a  circle  whose  radius 
was  five  miles,  and  whose  center  was  at  the 
head  of  tidewater  on  the  Potomac,  that  part  of 
the  circle  only  lying  on  the  left  bank  of  the 
river.  For  this  he  proposed  to  pay  the  Com¬ 
pany  fifteen  hundred  pounds. 

“Why  would  you  choose  that  particular 
spot  ?  ”  asked  the  Treasurer.  “  Captain  Smith 
says  the  cliffs  there  look  in  spots  as  if  sprinkled 
with  silver.” 

“  Captain  Smith  sent  you  a  load  of  that 
glittering  earth  ;  how  much  silver  did  you  get 
out  of  it  ?  ”  retorted  Ralph. 

“  Not  a  grain,  I  confess,”  replied  the  Treas- 


68 


ABISTOPIA. 


urer.  “  Not  a  grain  of  gold  or  silver  lias  come 
from  Virginia.” 

“  The  spot  I  ask/’  replied  Ralph,  u  lies  at 
the  head  of  navigation  of  a  broad  river,  and 
such  I  deem  a  fit  place  for  a  city.  Then,  too, 
just  above  is  a  goodly  water-power,  which  I 
am  resolved  to  make  not  only  turn  mills  to 
grind  grain,  but  to  saw  boards,  turn  lathes, 
and  do  much  other  work  now  done  by  man 
and  beast.” 

The  Treasurer  thought  the  young  man  a 
visionary. 

As  Ralph  was  to  take  out  a  colony  at  his 
own  expense,  and  as  the  Jamestown  colony 
had  already  cost  the  Company  many  thousand 
pounds,  the  only  return  for  which  had  been 
two  or  three  cargoes  of  cedar-wood,  and  little 
prospect  of  a  betterment,  the  Company  were  not 
loth  to  take  fifteen  hundred  pounds  sterling 
of  good  gold  and  give  Ralph  a  grant  in  fee- 
simple  of  the  soil,  waters,  forests,  and  minerals 
(though  they  objected  somewhat  to  this  item), 
with  the  power  of  lieutenant-governor  in  the 
local  government  of  the  colony,  the  general 
government  subordinate  to  the  Virginia 
Council. 

Ralph’s  scheme  had  by  this  time  developed, 


ABISTOPIA. 


69 


not  merely  into  establishing  a  colony,  but 
founding  a  nation  in  Virginia. 

One  of  Ralph’s  first  cares  was  to  supply  his 
mother  with  money  sufficient  to  satisfy  all 
her  wants,  and  the  next  to  induce  his  oldest 
brother,  James,  to  give  up  everything  else  and 
act  as  his  agent,  in  conjunction  with  John 
Somers  and  Edward  Morton,  Ralph’s  third 
brother,  now  just  ready  to  enter  business  as 
a  London  merchant.  As  soon  as  possible  he 
bought  a  staunch  vessel  of  two  hundred  tons, 
called  the  Flora,  and  induced  Captain  Nelson 
to  sell  his  bark  and  take  command  of  her. 

Meanwhile  Ralph  and  his  agents  were  en¬ 
gaging  emigrants  for  his  colony.  The  first  lot 
he  determined  should  all  go  out  as  his  em¬ 
ployees,  or  the  families  of  his  employees. 
With  the  exception  of  three  or  four  mechanics, 
they  must  all  be  laborers,  most  of  them  agri¬ 
cultural  laborers. 

The  next  and  most  difficult  consideration 
was  the  religious  one.  Ralph  determined  there 
should  be  full  religious  toleration  in  his  colony. 
The  times  were,  above  all  others  of  history, 
those  of  the  fiercest  intolerance  and  bigotry, 
of  which  England  was  a  religious  hot-bed. 
Ralph  Morton  was  philosopher  enough  to  see 


70 


ARISTOPIA. 


that  all  the  so-called  Christian  creeds  of  the 
age  (and  ten  times  more  the  practice  of  the 
sectarians  of  those  creeds)  were  bloodthirsty 
and  paganistic — a  bitter  mockery  of  the  teach¬ 
ings  of  the  Prince  of  Peace. 

Perhaps  the  least  intolerant  of  the  people  of 
western  Europe  of  that  time  were  the  English 
Catholics,  among  whom  was  only  a  small  class 
of  fanatics.  It  would  do  to  admit  the  moder¬ 
ate  Catholics  to  the  colony,  but  for  some  rea¬ 
sons  it  would  be  unwise  to  have  a  majority  of 
them.  Next  to  the  Catholics  the  Church  of 
England  people  were  least  intolerant.  Ref¬ 
erence  is  here  made  to  the  body  of  the  Episco¬ 
palians,  not  to  the  officials  of  the  government. 
The  intolerance  these  officials  showed  was 
rather  political  than  religious,  rather  aimed  at 
sedition  than  heresy. 

Although  the  Church  people  in  authority 
sternly,  even  cruelly,  repressed  the  Catholics,  it 
was  for  two  strong  reasons :  first,  the  diaboli¬ 
cal  plots  of  a  few  fanatics,  mostly  Jesuits — 
plots  which  the  great  body  of  English  Catholics 
abhorred  and  of  which  they  were  innocent ; 
and,  second,  the  clamors  of  the  great  and  grow¬ 
ing  body  of  Puritans,  a  sect  or  variety  of 
sects  of  fanatics  who,  although  they  did  much 


ARISTOPIA. 


71 


to  restore  English  political  liberty  when  it  was 
at  its  lowest  ebb,  carried  religious  intolerance 
to  its  utmost  extremity  of  virulence  and  vio¬ 
lence.  These  intractables  Ralph  resolved  to 
shut  out  from  his  colony  as  long  as  possible. 
But  as  a  large  portion  of  the  laboring  class  of 
England,  especially  the  rural  class,  were  ad¬ 
herents  of  the  established  Church,  and  rather 
indifferent  ones  at  that,  it  was  not  difficult  to 
procure  colonists  among  whom  religious  tolera¬ 
tion  could  be  sustained. 

The  disasters  of  the  Jamestown  colony  had 
been  kept  as  secret  as  possible,  and  great  num¬ 
bers  of  English  people  were  willing  to  go  to 
America.  The  Virginia  Company  could  have 
found  ship-loads  of  honest  laborers,  but  they 
thought  a  dissolute  “  gentleman,”  or  even  his 
footman  or  valet,  was  more  worthy  than  an  in¬ 
dustrious  peasant.  Ralph  Morton  had  no  such 
class  prejudice.  He  wanted  educated  persons 
for  teachers,  clerks,  physicians,  etc.,  but  for 
the  rest,  no  man  who  was  unwilling  to  do  six 
days,  good  hard  manual  labor  a  week. 

The  time  of  sailing  was  fixed  so  that  the 
colony  should  arrive  at  their  destination  at  the 
end  of  the  winter,  yet  early  enough  to  clear 
ground  and  plant  corn  and  vegetables. 


72 


ARISTOPIA. 


Ralph  again  took  with  him  his  brothers, 
Henry  and  Charles.  Besides  the  Mortons  and 
the  crew  of  the  vessel,  there  were  forty-four 
men,  twelve  women,  and  eighteen  children.  It 
was  not  until  the  third  voyage  that  any  women 
had  ventured  to  go  to  the  Jamestown  colony, 
but  Ralph  had  sufficient  confidence  to  take 
along  the  families  of  twelve  of  his  men 
whose  wives  were  willing  to  go.  Among  the 
men  were  two  carpenters,  one  mason,  one  shoe¬ 
maker,  and  one  blacksmith. 

The  Flora  sailed  from  the  mouth  of  the 
Thames  on  the  twentieth  of  January,  1610, 
and  arrived  at  her  destination  on  the  Potomac 
the  eighteenth  of  March.  Ralph  stopped 
at  the  village  of  the  Nacotchtanks  and  pur¬ 
chased  of  them  a  piece  of  ground  bounded  by 
the  Potomac  and  the  Eastern  Branch,  of  a 
day’s  journey  in  compass.  He  paid  for  the 
land  in  red  blankets,  which  the  Indians  much 
fancied,  and  hoes,  of  which  he  showed  them 
the  use,  and  gave  them  a  grindstone  on  which 
to  sharpen  them. 


ARISTOPIA. 


73 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

The  site  for  the  town  was  selected  a  few 
hundred  yards  above  the  mouth  of  Rock  Creek, 
where  the  ground  is  high  enough  to  be  free 
from  malaria,  while  the  hill  is  not  inconveni¬ 
ently  steep.  Springs  of  pure  water  were  near 
at  hand. 

Several  tents  had  been  brought,  and  with 
these  and  tarpaulins  and  boards  convenient 
shelters  were  soon  set  up  on  a  little  clearing 
made  for  the  purpose.  Then  began  the  work 
of  felling  trees  for  house-timber.  Of  course, 
the  first  land  to  be  cleared  was  the  space  for 
the  village.  After  that  the  trees  were  felled 
on  a  spot  near  the  mouth  of  the  creek  well 
adapted  for  tillage,  so  as  to  be  clearing  a  field 
with  the  same  labor  that  procured  building 
material.  It  was  decided  to  build  the  first 
square  of  the  village  of  thirty  cabins,  fif¬ 
teen  by  twenty  feet,  around  a  square,  three 
hundred  feet  on  each  side.  The  intervals  be¬ 
tween  the  houses  were  to  be  filled  with  a  stock- 


74 


ARISTOPIA. 


ade.  All  the  doors  and  windows  were  to  be 
on  the  inside  of  the  square,  while  in  the  outer 
walls  were  to  be  no  openings  except  loopholes 
for  muskets ;  for  it  was  determined  to  make 
the  village  a  fort,  trusting  nothing  to  the 
savages.  Though  the  Nacotchtanks  were  at 
present  friendly,  the  Massawomeks  might  come, 
and  Ralph  Morton  knew  that  barbarian  nature 
is  fickle  and  inconstant. 

The  cabins  at  Jamestown  had  been  thatched 
with  reeds,  and  thatch  was  quite  a  common 
roofing  for  English  country-houses,  but  Ralph 
had  seen  in  the  Jamestown  conflagration  the 
dangers  of  such  roofs.  It  was  decided  to  make 
the  roofs  of  u  shakes,”  or  shingles,  about  three 
feet  long,  split  from  straight-grained  timber.  A 
supply  of  froes  had  been  brought  over  for 
splitting  shakes.  In  fact,  Ralph’s  forethought 
had  supplied  everything.  His  experience  in 
logging  at  Jamestown  enabled  him  to  invent 
a  truck  for  hauling  logs.  It  had  two  wheels, 
placed  much  closer  together  than  those  of  an 
ordinary  wagon,  so  as  to  pass  more  easily  be¬ 
tween  trees  and  stumps.  The  axle  was  like  the 
drum  of  a  windlass,  so  that  a  log  could  be 
loaded  by  drawing  it  up  with  a  chain  wound 
up  by  turning  the  axle  with  spikes.  The  chain 


ARISTOPIA. 


75 


was  fastened  to  the  log  between  the  large  end 
of  the  log  and  the  middle,  leaving  the  small 
end  to  drag  on  the  ground. 

The  larger  logs  were  split  in  two,  thus  econo¬ 
mizing  material  and  making  the  work  of  raising 
the  logs  upon  the  Avails  lighter.  It  was  found 
that  they  could  he  split  more  easily  Avith  a 
charge  of  blasting-powder  than  Avith  wedges. 

The  cabins  Avere  supplied  Avith  stone  fire¬ 
places,  building  stone  being  close  at  hand,  very 
broad,  as  wood  Avas  plentiful.  The  chimneys 
were  made  of  sticks,  thickly  covered  Avith  clay, 
to  keep  them  from  burning.  As  glass  was 
then  scarce  and  dear,  the  colony  used  little  of 
it  in  their  windoAvs,  which  Avere  mostly  made  of 
oiled  muslin.  In  that  age  people  procured  light 
in  their  houses  mostly  by  leaving  the  doors 
open,  except  in  stormy  weather. 

Ralph  Morton  supervised  the  work  with  con¬ 
stant  care  and  good  judgment,  apportioning  the 
labor  of  felling  trees,  cutting  and  notching  the 
logs,  splitting  the  shakes,  raising  the  logs,  etc., 
among  the  men,  so  that  no  strength  would  be 
wasted.  For  hauling  the  material  there  were 
two  span  of  horses  and  two  yoke  of  oxen,  with 
two  Avagons  and  three  logging  trucks.  As 
many  men  as  could  work  without  getting  in 


76 


AEI  ST  OP  I  A. 


each  other’s  way  were  put  upon  one  house, 
to  finish  it  as  soon  as  possible. 

Until  the  first  house  was  finished,  the  women 
and  children  slept  on  board  the  vessel;  after¬ 
ward  they  slept  in  the  houses.  Until  houses 
enough  for  all  to  sleep  in  were  finished  a  guard 
of  three  men,  assisted  by  three  mastiffs,  was 
kept  at  night.  It  was  observed  that  the 
Indians  were  much  afraid  of  these  great  dogs. 
Four  small  cannon  were  planted,  one  at  each 
corner  of  the  fort. 

The  sailors  were  kept  at  work  while  the 
vessel  stayed.  A  good  many  of  the  Indians 
also  assisted  in  such  work  as  they  could  do.  It 
has  been  supposed  that  Indian  men  cannot  be 
induced  to  do  manual  labor,  but  this  is  not  the 
case.  They  assisted  in  loading  the  ships  of  the 
first  English  traders  with  sassafras  wood,  on 
the  Atlantic  coast ;  in  the  far  Northwest  I  have 
seen  them  working  as  lumbermen,  and  in  the 
far  Southwest  as  railroad  graders ;  but  they  will 
not  work  continuously.  Three  consecutive 
days  is  the  very  longest  time  they  will  labor. 
Morton  would  riot  trust  the  Indians  in  the 
village  at  night*  He  made  them  withdraw  to 
their  camp  before  dark.  As  the  Indians  learned 
the  great  value  of  hoes  in  cultivating  their 


ARISTOPIA. 


77 


oorn,  their  women  were  glad  to  help  the  white 
men  clear  their  fields,  taking  hoes  in  payment. 
A  squaw  would  willingly  work  three  days  for 
a  narrow  hoe  that  cost  Morton  fifteen  pence. 
The  Indians  had  heretofore  used  the  shoulder- 
blades  of  elks  and  bears  for  hoes  and  shovels. 

The  Indians  also  supplied  the  colony  with 
fresh  meat  in  exchange  for  ornamental  trinkets. 
Seines  had  been  provided  with  which  plenty  of 
fish  were  easily  taken  from  the  river  near  by. 

When  the  houses  were  completed  and  the 
stockade  was  built,  work  was  directed  to  clearing 
and  planting  a  field.  Indian  corn,  beans,  peas, 
pumpkins,  and  Irish  potatoes  were  planted. 
The  last  vegetable  was  as  yet  little  known  in 
England,  but  Ralph  Morton  was  quick  to  see 
its  value  as  a  food-plant,  and  had  brought  some 
tubers  for  planting. 

The  Flora  remained  with  the  colony  about 
six  weeks,  that  the  sailors  might  assist  in 
building  the  houses  and  loading  the  ship. 
Part  of  a  cargo,  consisting  of  stave-bolts  split 
from  the  best  white-oak  trees,  sassafras,  and 
cedar,  was  loaded,  and  the  vessel  returned  to 
England  for  another  load  of  colonists  and 

Besides  the  horses  and  oxen,  there  had  been 


78 


ARISTOPIA. 


brought  out  three  good  cows,  half  a  dozen 
young  pigs,  and  a  dozen  chickens. 

As  the  settlement  was  now  in  fact  a  village, 
it  needed  a  name.  Ralph  proposed  to  call  it 
Columbia,  but  his  brothers  importuned  him  to 
call  it  Mortonia,  and  so  it  was  named. 

Soon  after  his  arrival,  Ralph  visited  his 
mine,  and  found  if  undisturbed.  He  did  noth¬ 
ing  more  about  it  until  the  houses  were  built 
and  the  field  was  planted.  Then  he  set  men 
at  work  to  build  a  house  over  the  mine.  The 
foundation  of  the  building  was  made  of  large 
stones  laid  in  cement.  This  foundation  was 
raised  to  a  level,  it  being  on  a  steep  hill-side, 
and  the  rest  of  the  building  was  made  of  logs 
about  a  foot  thick.  The  roof  was  of  shed 
form,  sloping  with  the  hill,  made  of  two-inch 
oak-plank  firmly  spiked  on.  The  small  door 
was  of  heavy  oak  plank.  There  was  only  one 
window,  narrow,  and  guarded  with  iron  bars. 
The  room  was  about  fifteen  feet  square  and 
eight  feet  high.  A  large  number  of  men 
were  kept  at  work  on  the  building,  to  finish  it 
as  soon  as  possible.  During  the  time  it  was 
being  built  Ralph  slept  every  night  over  the 
mine  on  a  bed  of  pine  boughs,  bear-skins,  and 
blankets.  The  workmen  had  a  camp  near  by. 


ARISTOPIA . 


79 


Of  course,  the  men  were  curious  to  know 
what  the  building  was  for,  and  it  was  hinted 
that  it  was  for  a  prison  ;  then  they  were  curi¬ 
ous  to  know  why  a  prison  should  be  built 
there,  nearly  three  miles  from  the  town.  The 
whites  considering  it  a  prison,  and  the  Indians 
being  informed  that  it  was  “  bad  medicine,”  no 
one  was  likely  to  try  to  get  into  it,  and  Ralph’s 
object  was  to  prevent  anyone  from  discovering 
the  mine  inside. 

Henry  and  Charles  Morton  had  been  in¬ 
formed  of  the  existence  of  the  mine,  under  the 
strongest  bond  of  secrecy.  Ralph  had  refused 
to  inform  his  other  brothers  and  John  Somers 
of  the  source  of  his  wealth,  but  let  them  infer 
from  the  legend  on  the  gold  bars  that  he  had 
been  in  at  the  capture  of  a  Spanish  West 
Indian  carrick,  something  which  most  English¬ 
men  still  considered  by  no  means  a  reprehen¬ 
sible  proceeding,  although  there  had  been 
peace  between  England  and  Spain  for  several 
years. 

The  spring  and  summer  passed  without  any 
such  epidemic  as  Ralph  Morton  somewhat  ap¬ 
prehended.  There  was  some  mild,  temporary 
sickness  from  change  of  climate,  and  some 
from  ordinary  causes,  but  there  had  been  no 


80 


ABISTOPIA. 


deaths.  The  location  was  high  and  healthful, 
the  water  pure  and  cool,  the  food  good  and 
plentiful,  and  everything  had  been  ordered 
with  so  much  forethought,  that  not  only  was 
disaster,  but  even  discomfort,  avoided.  The 
crops  ripened  and  added  to  the  colonists’  store. 
Of  course,  in  the  crude,  freshly-cleared  soil 
they  were  not  so  good  as  the  next  year’s  crops 
should  be,  but  they  were  fair. 

During  the  latter  part  of  the  summer  the 
colonists  had  leisure  to  build  another  square  of 
cabins  for  the  new  immigrants  whose  arrival  was 
expected,  and  to  provide  a  large  supply  of  stave 
bolts,  sassafras  and  cedar  for  loading  the  Flora 
as  soon  as  she  should  arrive  and  discharge  her 

o 

cargo. 

In  August,  Ralph  and  his  two  brothers  went 
to  work  in  the  mine  to  get  out  more  gold.  The 
quartz  about  the  mass  of  gold  was  dug  out  all 
around  for  a  depth  of  two  feet  or  more.  It 
was  then  found  that  the  gold  filled  a  crevice 
in  the  quartz,  in  a  solid  sheet  about  six  inches 
thick,  and  from  six  to  eight  feet  long,  the 
length  in  the  same  direction  as  that  of  the 
quartz  dike.  A  small  hole  being  dug  to  a 
depth  of  ten  feet,  it  was  found  that  the  mass 
extended  still  farther  downward.  Ralph  was 


ABISTOPIA. 


81 


then  assured  of  wealth  enough  to  carry  out  his 
design  of  founding  a  nation.  It  was  much 
labor  to  saw  the  blocks  of  gold  out  of  this  mass. 
A  thousand  pounds  avoirdupois  was  got  out 
and  cast  into  bars  in  the  moulds  with  the  Span¬ 
ish  legends  which,  with  the  crucibles,  Ralph 
had  brought  with  him. 


82 


ARISTOPIA. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

The  Flora  arrived  again  about  the  middle 
of  September,  bringing  ninety-two  immigrants, 
of  whom  eighteen  were  women  and  twenty-four 
children.  Among  the  men  were  two  car¬ 
penters,  one  blacksmith,  and  one  tailor.  There 
was  also  a  young  physician.  Hitherto  Ralph 
Morton  had  acted  as  physician  to  the  colony. 
There  was,  too,  a  clergyman,  a  young  man 
who,  without  powerful  connections,  had  de¬ 
spaired  of  getting  a  u  living  ”  in  England,  and 
had  concluded  to  trust  Providence  in  America. 
He  had  been  informed  that  he  could  expect  no 
tithes  nor  anything  for  his  religious  services 
except  voluntary  contributions,  but  that  he 
would  be  paid  a  fair  salary  for  teaching  the 
children  of  the  colony  as  long  as  he  chose,  if 
he  would  a<n*ee  to  teach  until  another  teacher 

O 

could  be  procured.  His  theology  was  of  a 
somewhat  mild  type,  rather  inclining  to  a  doc¬ 
trine  of  love  than  delightingto  deal  damnation 
to  heretics,  as  was  the  fashion  and  the  passion 


ARISTOPIA. 


83 


of  the  times  in  theology.  Ralph  Morton  was 
very  glad  of  this,  and  encouraged  the  pastor 
all  he  could.  It  must  not  be  supposed  that  the 
colony  had  gone  without  religious  services  all 
this  time.  In  such  a  body  of  Englishmen  at 
that  time  there  were  always  to  be  found  men 
able  and  willing  to  lead  in  such  services  as 
reading  the  liturgy  and  the  Bible,  singing 
psalms,  and  praying.  A  leader  in  all  things 
else,  Ralph  Morton  was  a  very  modest  follower 
here. 

Among  the  first  immigrants  to  the  James¬ 
town  colony  were  half  a  dozen  tailors,  several 
perfumers  and  barbers,  and  four  goldsmiths, 
jewelers,  and  “  refiners.”  With  the  exception 
of  the  one  tailor,  there  were  no  such  people  in 
the  Mortonia  colony.  But  there  was  one  arti¬ 
san  on  the  Flora  many  years  ahead  of  any  of  his 
guild  in  any  other  colony  of  America — a  printer. 

The  reason  of  his  coming  thus  early  was 
that  Ralph  Morton  had  determined  to  reform 
the  English  language  in  spelling  and  grammar, 
at  least  so  far  as  it  was  to  be  used  in  his  new 
nation.  In  his  study  of  several  languages  he 
had  often  cause  to  wonder  at  the  perverse  folly 
of  people  in  retaining  so  tenaciously  the  bewil¬ 
dering  irregularities  of  their  grammar,  when 


84 


ARISTOPIA. 


regularity  would  have  been  so  much  easier  and 
better.  He  determined  to  make  the  conju¬ 
gations  of  all  verbs,  the  comparison  of  all  adjec¬ 
tives,  and  the  plurals  of  all  nouns  quite  regular 
in  all  the  printing  done  in  his  new  nation. 

The  spelling  of  English  of  that  day  was  a 
marvel  of  confusion.  There  was  no  dictionary 
or  other  authority  or  standard  of  spelling. 
Although  the  spelling  of  a  large  number  of 
words  was  somewhat  fixed  in  a  barbarous  and 
bungling  way,  most  words  were  spelled  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  caprices  of  the  writers,  and  it  was 
no  uncommon  thing  to  find  the  same  word 
spelled  two  or  three  different  ways  in  the  same 
paragraph.  Then,  too,  the  u’s  and  the  v’s 
took  each  other’s  places  in  the  most  bewilder¬ 
ing-  manner. 

Ralph  had  made  a  very  careful  study  of  the 
sounds  of  the  language.  He  saw  how  utterly 
inadequate  to  represent  all  those  sounds  were 
the  twenty-six  letters  of  the  Roman  alphabet. 
The  only  hope  of  a  rational  spelling  was  to  in¬ 
vent  new  characters.  So  he  invented  eleven 
new  characters,  both  print  and  script ;  six 
vowel  and  five  consonant  letters.  The  new 
vowel  letters  were  mostly  small  changes  in  the 
old  letters  to  represent  the  cognate  sounds  of 


ARISTOPIA. 


85 


those  old  letters.  In  the  old  vowel  letters  the 
principal  rule  was  to  use  each  one  to  represent 
that  sound  which  it  most  frequently  represented 
in  the  common  spelling.  Then  each  letter 
must  always  represent  one  and  the  same  sound, 
and  each  sound  he  invariably  represented  by 
the  same  letter.  This  would  give  order,  system, 
and  regularity  instead  of  the  present  disorder, 
confusion,  and  chaos.  The  letters  q  and  x  and 
the  long  s  were  rejected  as  useless. 

Ralph  had  ordered  from  Venice  (where  were 
then  the  best  type-cutters)  the  dies  for  his  new 
characters  in  all  ordinary  sizes  of  type.  The 
type  were  to  be  cast  in  Holland,  for  greater 
convenience  of  shipping.  In  this  cargo  was 
only  a  hundred  pounds  of  the  size  now  called 
great  primer.  This  was  intended  for  printing 
elementary  reading-books.  Ralph  had  spent 
considerable  time  in  his  ocean  voyages  writing 
two  well-graded  reading-books  for  beginners, 
lessons  of  short,  familiar  words  and  simple 
ideas.  No  such  sensible  books  then  existed. 
With  the  type  was  a  press.  There  were  also 
all  other  necessary  materials  for  printing, 
including  plenty  of  paper.  The  printer,  who 
was  also  a  bookbinder,  was  immediately  set  at 
work  on  a  child’s  primer. 


86 


ARISTOPIA. 


The  greater  part  of  the  colonists  now  in 
Mortonia  and  those  to  come  spoke  some  un¬ 
couth  dialect  of  English,  and  few  of  them  could 
read,  so  they  were  not  likely  to  make  objection 
to  the  innovation.  The  only  objections  came 
from  the  teachers  and  the  few  educated  persons ; 
but  these  were  so  much  under  Ralph  Morton’s 
influence  and  so  dependent  on  him  that  they 
yielded,  and  when  they  became  accustomed  to 
the  innovation  were  its  most  zealous  supporters. 

As  before  said,  the  first  colonists  were  all 
employes  of  Ralph  Morton.  He  had  paid 
them  from  the  day  of  their  embarking  such 
wages  as  they  were  accustomed  to  receive  in 
England,  considering  the  food  and  lodgings 
furnished  them.  On  the  arrival  of  the  second 
company,  however,  Ralph  called  them  all  to¬ 
gether  and  proposed  to  them  to  form  a  new 
commonwealth,  better  than  the  world  had  ever 
seen  before.  The  opportunity,  in  a  virgin 
world,  was  before  them  ;  the  means,  he  sol¬ 
emnly  assured  them,  he  held  in  his  hands  ;  he 
would  devote  all  those  means  and  his  life  to 
establishing  such  a  c ommo n weal th — a  common¬ 
wealth  not  a  mockery  of  the  name,  as  England 
was,  where  the  rich  idlers  revelled  in  luxury  on 
the  proceeds  of  the  toil  of  the  wretched  and 


ARISTOPIA. 


87 


drudging  poor.  In  an  ideal  republic,  after  it 
was  established,  the  governor  should  be  chosen 
by  the  people  for  a  stated  term  and  be  removable. 
But  this  commonwealth  was  first  to  be  estab¬ 
lished,  and  for  such  establishment,  and  to  insure 
the  proper  application  of  the  vast  means  he  held 
ready,  it  was  necessary  that  he  should  be  gov¬ 
ernor  for  life.  What  he  had  already  done  in 
bringing  them  all  over  free  and  maintaining  them 
so  far  was  but  a  grain  of  sand  on  the  seashore  to 
what  he  would  do.  But  they  must  adopt  the 
system  of  government  he  proposed.  He  was 
willing  to  spend  his  wealth  and  his  life  for  no 
other.  He  had  drawn  up  a  constitution  and  a 
code  of  laws.  The  code  might  be  added  to 
and  altered  by  the  representatives  of  the  people 
or  the  people  themselves,  but  the  constitution 
was  not  to  be  altered  without  the  consent  of 
the  governor. 

Ralph  Morton  had  spent  much  thought  on  a 
model  commonwealth,  and  brought  to  the  task 
a  wide  knowledge  of  history  in  all  ages,  a 
mind  of  powerful  grasp,  deep  insight,  and  long 
foresight,  and  an  unselfish  devotion  to  the 
good  of  his  fellows.  It  was  the  sudden  spring¬ 
ing  up  of  ideas  inspired  by  this  devotion  that 
led  him  to  conceal  the  existence  of  the  mine, 


88 


AIIISTOPIA. 


and  not  the  cunning  and  calculating  selfish¬ 
ness  which  such  a  course  might  seem  to  in¬ 
dicate. 

One  of  the  books  which  had  given  Ralph 
Morton  many  ideas  of  a  model  commonwealth 
was  Thomas  More’s  Utopia.  This  book  has 
long  been  misunderstood  and  misrepresented. 
It  has  generally  been  spoken  of  as  the  scheme  of 
a  mild  lunatic  for  upsetting  all  the  good  old 
order  of  society,  and  instituting  in  its  place 
something  as  impossible  for  human  beings 
with  their  sinful  nature  to  attain  (without  first 
dying)  as  it  would  be  for  those  same  gross 
mortals  to  live  (without  first  dying)  in  the 
Elysian  Fields  above  the  sunset  clouds.  In  fair 
truth,  More’s  book  contained  only  the  sane, 
wise  ideas  of  a  man  centuries  ahead  of  his  age, 
a  lover  of  humanity  more  than  of  self.  One 
by  one,  as  the  centuries  wore  away,  his  wild 
imaginings,  as  they  seemed  to  be,  became  the 
accomplished  facts  of  history.  Human  nature 
was  found  to  be  capable  of  better  things  than 
bigoted  theologians  or  sneering  cynics  thought 
possible.  That  great  seer’s  splendid  visions 
yet  unfulfilled  are  no  more  impossible  than 
what  has  been  accomplished.  But  let  us  hope 
that  the  accomplishment  will  be  accelerated,  so 


ART  STOP  I  A. 


89 


that  a  work  equal  to  that  of  past  centuries 
may  he  done  in  a  few  future  years. 

Thomas  More  spent  his  childhood  in  the  house¬ 
hold  of  Cardinal  Morton,  a  brother  of  one  of 
Ralph  Morton’s  ancestors  (which  fact  perhaps 
helped  to  attract  Ralph’s  attention  to  More’s 
work),  where  his  precocious  ability  was  a  con¬ 
stant  marvel.  At  Oxford  his  career  did  not 
belie  the  old  Cardinal’s  prophecy  of  his  future 
greatness.  One  of  the  most  religious  of  men, 
even  to  asceticism,  bigots  called  him  a  free¬ 
thinker.  Entering  Parliament  at  twenty-six, 
he  was  instrumental  in  the  rejection  of  a  heavy 
subsidy  demanded  by  Henry  VII.  Leaving 
Parliament,  he  became  a  prominent  lawyer.. 
Under  Henry  VIII.  he  was  a  trusted  counselor 
and  a  diplomatist.  It  was  in  one  of  his  di¬ 
plomatic  missions  to  Holland  that,  as  his  story 
goes,  he  met  the  ancient  mariner,  a  companion 
of  Amerigo  Vespucci,  who  had  discovered,  in 
the  depths  of  the  virgin  continent,  the  re¬ 
public  of  Utopia.  In  Utopia  human  virtue 
(which  theologians  esteem  as  naught)  had  at¬ 
tained  the  true  ends  of  society — liberty,  equal¬ 
ity,  fraternity,  and  security.  In  England, 
More  truthfully  said,  “  the  whole  of  society  is 
but  a  conspiracy  of  the  rich  against  the  poor. 


90 


A1USTOPIA. 


The  rich  are  ever  striving  to  pare  away  some¬ 
thing  further  from  the  daily  wages  of  the  poor 
by  private  fraud,  and  even  by  public  law,  so 
that  the  wrong  already  existing — for  it  is  a 
wron<x  that  those  from  whom  the  state  derives 
most  benefit  should  receive  least  reward — is 
made  yet  greater  by  the  law  of  the  state.  The 
rich  devise  every  means  by  which  they  may, 
in  the  first  place,  secure  to  themselves  what 
they  have  amassed  by  wrong,  and  then  take  to 
their  own  use  and  profit,  at  the  lowest  possible 
price,  the  labor  of  the  poor.  And  so  soon  as 
the  rich  decide  on  adopting  these  devices  in 
the  name  of  the  public,  then  they  become  law. 
The  toiling  poor  are  reduced  to  a  life  so 
wretched  that  even  a  beast’s  life  seems  en¬ 
viable.” 

Turning  from  this  pitiful  picture  of  the 
English  laborer  of  the  sixteenth  century,  from 
the  horrible  social  tyranny  that  found  expres¬ 
sion  in  every  page  of  the  English  statute 
book,  More  tells  us  that  in  Utopia  the  aim  of 
legislation  is  the  true  social,  industrial,  moral, 
and  intellectual  welfare  of  the  whole  com¬ 
munity,  of  which  the  labor-class  is  the  most 
important.  As  work  was  compulsory  with  all — 
no  class  of  idlers,  called “  noble  ”and“  gentle,” 


ARISTOPIA. 


91 


living  on  their  stealthy  robberies  of  the 
workers,  as  in  England — the  hours  of  labor 
could  he  shortened  to  nine,  which  would  have 
seemed  short  indeed  to  the  English  laborer  of 
that  age.  The  hours  thus  saved  from  manual 
labor  were  devoted  to  the  cultivation  of  the 
mind.  To  this  end  a  thorough  system  of 
public  education  was  maintained.  In  England 
few  laborers  could  read.  In  Utopia  every 
child  was  well  educated.  The  physical  side  of 
life  in  Utopia  was  as  attractive  as  the  mental. 
While  in  England  in  More’s  day  the  common 
people  dwelt  in  “  low  and  homely  cottages  and 
poor  shepherd  huts  made  at  all  adventure  of 
every  rude  piece  of  timber  that  came  first  to 
hand,  with  mud  walls  and  ridged  roofs  thatched 
over  with  straw,”  nests  of  squalor,  filth,  and 
pestilence,  in  Utopia  the  houses  were  spacious, 
well  lighted,  airy,  comfortable,  and  clean. 
“  The  streets  were  twenty  feet  broad” — in 
English  towns  of  that  day  they  were  not  half 
that — “  the  houses  backed  by  spacious  gardens 
and  curiously  budded  after  a  gorgeous  and 
gallant  sort,  with  their  stories  one  after  an¬ 
other.  They  keep  the  wind  out  of  their 
windows  with  glass,  for  it  is  there  much  used, 
and  sometimes  also  with  fine  linen  cloth  dipped 


92 


ARISTOPIA. 


in  oil  or  amber,  for  by  this  means  more  light 
cometli  in  and  the  wind  is  better  kept  out.” 
In  More’s  days  the  window  of  the  English 
cottage  was  literally  a  wind-hole  in  the  wall. 

In  England  the  petty  thief  received  the  same 
punishment  as  the  murderer — death  for  almost 
every  crime.  In  Utopia  the  object  of  legal 
punishment  was  as  much  to  reform  the  criminal 
as  to  protect  society.  In  fact,  More,  in  Utopia, 
anticipates  all  those  reforms  in  the  treatment 
of  criminals  which  distinguish  the  nineteenth 
from  the  brutal  and  savage  sixteenth  century. 

In  Utopia  was  that  complete  religious  toler¬ 
ation  which  was  looked  for  in  vain  in  Europe 
until  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth  century. 
In  Utopia  there  was  political  liberty,  a  com¬ 
plete  democracy,  while  England,  under  the 
Tudor  tyrants,  was  fast  losing  the  little  politi¬ 
cal  liberty  she  ever  had.  Under  the  cover  of 
Utopia,  More  penned  a  scathing  denunciation 
of  the  tyranny  of  Henry  and  his  servile  judges. 
And  this,  too,  within  the  very  court  of  the 
king  and  under  the  eye  of  his  ministers.  No 
wonder  that  the  author  of  Utopia  paid  for  his 
devotion  to  liberty  and  humanity  with  his 
head,  on  Tower  Hill. 


ARISTOPIA. 


93 


CHAPTER  X. 

One  of  the  most  effective  means  by  which 
the  few  and  idle  rich  oppress  the  many  toiling 
poor  is  by  the  monopoly  of  land.  Ralph  Mor¬ 
ton’s  reading  had  shown  him  this  truth  illus¬ 
trated  by  the  history  of  all  civilized  peoples. 
But  he  had  before  his  eyes  in  England  so  fla¬ 
grant  an  example  that  it  needed  no  reading  to 
enforce  the  truth.  That  great  robber,  William 
the  Norman,  had  parceled  out  the  land  of  Eng¬ 
land  among  his  robber  favorites,  who  had  sub¬ 
divided  them  among  their  favorites,  with  the 
burden  of  some  conditions ;  and  so  on  down¬ 
ward  went  the  division,  the  burdens  all  the 
while  increasing  till  at  last  they  fell  with  crush¬ 
ing  force  on  the  poor  tillers  of  the  soil  and 
the  equally  unfortunate  disinherited,  driven 
altogether  from  the  soil.  So  horrible  an  ex¬ 
ample  of  a  great  mass  of  people  robbed  of  their 
natural  rights  seemed,  by  the  force  of  custom 
and  the  decorous  forms  of  law,  so  right  and 
proper  that  only  here  and  there,  adown  the 


94 


ABISTOPIA. 


centuries,  could  be  heard  a  voice  like  Thomas 
More’s  protesting  against  it. 

Morton  was  sure  that,  sooner  or  later,  Amer¬ 
ica  would  be  parceled  out  among  kings’  favor¬ 
ites,  just  as  Europe  had  been,  and  with  like 
wretched  results.  He  determined  to  prevent 
such  results  so  far  as  was  in  his  power.  He 
could  see  no  way  to  do  it  effectually  while 
allowing  private  ownership  of  land.  To  limit 
the  amount  of  land  one  man  might  own  pre¬ 
sented  insuperable  difficulties.  How  could  a 
just  limit  be  fixed  ?  Twenty  acres  of  agricul¬ 
tural  land  miodit  be  no  more  than  one  man  and 

O 

his  family  needed ;  but  twenty  acres  in  a  city, 
or  on  which  a  city  might  grow  up,  would  so 
enrich  a  man  and  make  him  master  of  his  fel¬ 
lows  that  he  could  oppress  and  corrupt  them 
by  thousands.  A  thousand  acres  of  mountain 
land,  fit  only  for  grazing,  might  be  none  too 
much  for  a  family;  but  a  thousand  acres  of 
good  agricultural  land  would  make  a  man  a 
landlord  with  a  horde  of  slavish  tenants.  So 
Morton’s  constitution  provided  that,  in  the 
Commonwealth,  there  should  be  no  private 
ownership  of  land,  including  waters,  forests, 
and  mines,  except  the  title  he  had  acquired 
from  the  Virginia  Company  and  the  title  he 


ARISTOPIA. 


95 


expected  to  acquire  from  the  king  to  other  and 
broader  lands.  This  title  he  was  to  hold  dur¬ 
ing  his  life  as  a  means  of  insuring  the  carrying 
out  of  his  views  ;  but,  although  the  ultimate 
title  of  the  land  rested  in  him,  the  practical 
ownership  should  be  in  the  Commonwealth, 
from  whom  the  citizens  should  hold  the  land. 
No  agricultural  land  should  be  leased  for 
longer  than  fifteen  years  at  one  lease,  and  no 
urban  land  for  longer  than  fifty  years.  These 
leases  could  be  renewed,  so  that  a  family  could 
make  a  home  and  have  a  security  for  its  con¬ 
tinued  possession — something  which  private 
ownership  does  not  give  to  the  nominal  owner, 
as  millions  of  poor  men  have  found  to  their 
sorrow.  The  Commonwealth  might,  until  it 
needed  the  rent  for  revenue,  allow  its  members 
land  rent  free,  but  no  more  to  one  man  than 
he  and  his  family  actually  tilled  or  used  with¬ 
out  hired  help. 

The  next  great  instrument  for  enriching  a 
few  at  the  expense  of  the  many  was,  Ralph 
Morton  saw,  the  traffic  in  merchandise.  No 
other  thing,  except  monopoly  of  land,  could  so 
encourage  a  selfish  and  greedy  disposition  as 
this  traffic.  Next  to  usury,  it  is  the  delight  of 
that  strange  vampire  race,  the  Hebrews.  The 


96 


ARISTOPIA. 


merchant  class  in  England  had  then  acquired 
but  little  of  the  tremendous  power  it  afterward 
attained ;  it  needed  the  foresight  of  Thomas 
More  or  Ralph  Morton  to  see  the  danger  to  an 
ideal  society — a  human  brotherhood — in  this 
traffic.  So  Morton’s  constitution  provided  that 
all  traffic  in  merchandise  in  the  commonwealth 
should  be  carried  on  by  the  public  agency.  A 
bureau  of  trade  appointed  by  the  governor 
should  import  and  export  all  goods.  Public 
stores  should  be  established,  with  storekeepers 
and  clerks  appointed  by  the  governor,  in  which 
goods  should  be  sold  to  the  inhabitants  of  the 
commonwealth,  and  their  produce  bought  for 
resale  or  export.  The  people  might  exchange 
their  commodities  with  each  other,  or  sell  them 
to  private  persons,  but  no  person  should  buy 
to  sell  again.  The  profits  on  the  purchase  and 
sale  of  goods  should  not  be  excessive,  and 
should  be  public  revenue  for  public  expenses. 

In  Ralph  Morton’s  mind  were  vaguely  out¬ 
lined  plans  for  making  all  sorts  of  machinery 
run  by  water-power  do  the  work  of  millions  of 
human  hands.  If  a  few  men  could  obtain 
possession  of  the  waterfalls,  and  by  wealth, 
somehow  acquired,  could  own  the  machines, 
they  would  become  the  masters  of  both  the 


ARISTOPIA. 


97 


workmen  who  attended  the  machines  and  those 
who  were  displaced  by  them.  So  the  constitu¬ 
tion  carefully  guarded  the  waterfalls  from  pri¬ 
vate  ownership  and  provided  for  the  public 
ownership  of  factories  run  by  water-power. 

In  these  provisions  for  the  public  manufac¬ 
ture  and  sale  of  goods  Morton  builded  better 
than  he  knew.  Not  even  his  genius,  nor  any 
other  less  than  inspired,  could  have  foreseen 
the  evils  which  a  manufacturing  and  trading 
age  would  produce :  the  evils  of  “  shoddy  ” 
goods;  of  articles  made  for  sale  and  not  for 
use,  and  useless  ;  of  fatal  defects  glossed  over 
by  the  manufacturers  and  hidden  by  lying 
salesmen ;  of  goods  deliberately  damaged  a 
dime’s  worth  to  the  user  that  the  manufacturer 
might  save  a  cent ;  of  deadly  poisons  in  food, 
drink,  and  drugs — yes,  in  wearing  apparel  and 
the  paper  of  bedrooms,  the  health  of  thousands 
ruined  and  their  lives  endangered  that  manu¬ 
facturers  and  tradesmen  might  make  a  few 
cents  from  each  victim.  And  the  deepest  pity 
of  it  all  is  that  the  most  frequent  and  most  in¬ 
jured  victims  are  the  poorest,  most  needy,  and 
most  helpless  members  of  society. 

As  another  guard  againt  the  undue  accumu¬ 
lation  of  wealth  in  the  hands  of  individuals, 
7 


98 


AB1ST0PIA. 


the  law  of  primogeniture  was  abolished.  A 
deceased  person’s  property  was  to  be  equally 
divided  between  bis  heirs — his  wife  (or,  if  a 
woman,  her  husband)  and  children ;  if  any  of 
the  children  were  dead  leaving  children  of  their 
own,  such  grandchildren  to  inherit  their  parents’ 
share  per  stirpes'  and  not  per  capita.  If  there 
were  no  wife  (or  husband)  or  descendants, 
the  property  to  go  to  the  parents  or  grand¬ 
parents  of  deceased ;  if  no  such  ancestors,  it 
was  to  escheat  to  the  commonwealth,  for  collat¬ 
eral  relatives  could  not  take.  No  person  should 
leave  more  than  ten  thousand  dollars  (about 
two  thousand  pounds)  to  one  heir.  If  his 
property  amounted  to  more  than  that  sum  for 
each  heir,  the  balance  was  to  escheat  to  the 
commonwealth.  As  no  person  then  in  the 
colony  (except  the  Mortons)  expected  to  have 
two  thousand  pounds,  nor  even  dreamed  of 
having  so  much  as  to  leave  two  thousand 
pounds  to  each  of  his  children,  no  objection 
could  be  made  by  the  settlers  to  this  provision. 
This  provision  could  not  be  evaded  by  a  will 
or  a  donatio  causa  mortis — death-bed  gift. 

Roads  and  bridges  must  be  public  property ; 
no  private  toll  road  or  bridge  would  be  allowed. 

A  code  of  laws  should  be  proposed  by  the 


ARISTOPIA. 


99 


governor  as  soon  after  his  election  as  practi¬ 
cable,  and  adopted  or  rejected  by  a  vote  of  the 
colonists  at  a  public  meeting.  After  that,  laws 
were  to  be  enacted  by  a  Congress  elected  by 
the  people ;  but  no  act  of  Congress  should  be 
a  law  unless  approved  by  the  governor,  or,  if 
vetoed  by  him,  unless  repassed  by  a  two-thirds 
vote  of  Congress.  To  prevent  too  frequent 
changes  of  laws,  Congress  should  have  but  one 
session  in  three  years,  unless  called  together  by 
the  governor  on  account  of  an  emergency.  As 
representatives  would  sometimes  misrepresent 
the  people,  provisions  were  made  by  which  the 
people  themselves  could  initiate  legislation,  and 
certain  classes  of  laws  of  a  radical  or  funda¬ 
mental  character  were  to  be  submitted  to  a  vote 
of  the  whole  people. 

It  is  needless  to  recite  the  details  of  the 
constitution  relating  to  the  necessary  officers 
of  the  commonwealth,  executive,  legislative, 
and  judicial,  and  their  election  or  appoint¬ 
ment. 

The  electors  were  to  be  every  male  citizen 
over  twenty  years  old,  unconvicted  of  felony, 
and  all  widows,  being  citizens,  over  thirty  years 
old.  Other  women  over  twenty  could  vote  for 
school  officers.  Morton  considered  these  pro- 


100 


AlilSTOPIA. 


visions  an  entering  wedge  for  greater  privileges 
for  women.  After  the  first  day  of  January, 
1612,  any  person  not  on  or  before  that  date  a 
resident  of  Mortonia  must  reside  in  the  colony 
five  years  to  acquire  the  rights  of  a  citizen  and 
elector. 

Any  amendment  to  the  constitution  must  he 
first  passed  by  a  two-thirds  vote  of  Congress 
and  then  receive  a  majority  vote  of  the  electors 
of  the  commonwealth  before  taking  effect ;  but 
no  amendment  could  he  adopted  during  the 
life  of  the  first  governor  without  his  ap- 

The  Constitution  was  submitted  to  the 
members  of  the  colony  and  adopted  without 
change,  without  a  murmur  of  dissent;  and 
Ralph  Morton  was  named  governor  for  life. 

The  code  of  criminal  laws  Governor  Morton 
proposed  differed  radically  from  the  laws  then 
in  force  in  England,  where  most  crimes  were 
punished  with  death,  although  death  in  differ¬ 
ent  forms,  from  beheading  and  hanging  to 
burning  at  the  stake  and  boiling  in  oil. 
Mutilation,  such  as  cutting  off  the  right  hand 
and  ears,  slitting  the  nostrils,  boring  the  tongue, 
and  branding,  was  common.  The  so-called 
crimes  of  blasphemy,  witchcraft,  sorcery,  and 


A  RI  STOP  I  A. 


101 


idolatry  were  punished  by  burning  to  death. 
The  Morton  Code  proclaimed  that  the  object 
of  punishment  was  to  protect,  not  to  revenge, 
society ;  that  where  possible  it  should  contem¬ 
plate  the  reformation,  not  the  destruction,  of 
the  criminal ;  that  savage  and  bloody  punish¬ 
ments  and  tortures  were  brutalizing  to  the 
*  whole  people  and  worthy  of  savage  and 
heathen,  not  of  civilized  and  Christian,  people. 
No  crime  except  murder  and  arson  of  a  dwell¬ 
ing  at  night  was  to  be  punished  with  death, 
and  that  death  in  no  form  except  hanging. 
Other  crimes  were  to  be  punished  in  propor¬ 
tion  to  their  enormity.  The  code  was  silent 
as  to  witchcraft,  blasphemy,  sorcery,  and  idol¬ 
atry.  Though  the  people  wondered  at  so 
mild  a  code,  they  adopted  it  by  a  large  major¬ 
ity.  In  the  minority  was  the  clergyman. 
Mild  as  he  was,  he  thought  it  well  to  burn 
some  people. 

Foreseeing  the  danger  to  the  colony  from 
the  savages  armed  with  firearms,  the  Morton 
Code  provided  that  any  person  convicted  of 
furnishing  to  an  Indian  any  firearm  or  gun¬ 
powder,  or  teaching  any  Indian  the  use  of 
firearms,  should  suffer  imprisonment  at  hard 
labor  (in  chains  until  a  prison  should  be  pro- 


102 


AllIS  TOP  I  A. 


vided)  for  three  years,  and  then  be  banished  to 
the  West  Indies.  If  he  returned  he  was  to 
suffer  death.  Severe  penalties  were  provided 
for  selling  swords,  or  knives  with  blades  more 
than  three  inches  long,  or  with  sharp  points, 
or  axes,  or  hatchets  to  Indians.  Every  fire¬ 
arm  in  the  possession  of  a  resident  of  the 
colony  was  to  be  registered,  and  he  might  be 
called  on  to  produce  it  at  any  time.  The  sale 
of  gunpowder  was  to  be  recorded  like  the  sale 
of  poison. 

The  Morton  Code  provided  for  public  schools 
for  all  the  children  of  the  colony,  making  at¬ 
tendance  compulsory.  All  teaching  in  these 
schools  was  to  be  in  the  English  language. 


AR1ST0PIA. 


103 


CHAPTER  XI. 

Houses  had  been  provided  for  the  shelter  of 
the  new-comers,  and  were  ready  for  them  on 
their  arrival.  A  schoolhouse,  by  far  the  largest 
and  best  house  in  the  colony,  was  immediately 
built.  The  walls  were  of  hewn  logs,  chinked 
with  stones  and  mortar  instead  of  sticks  and 
clay ;  and  an  abundance  of  glass  windows  were 
provided. 

Those  who  wished  to  go  to  farming  on  their 
own  account  immediately  had  land  allotted  to 
them,  ten  acres  to  each  man.  It  was  so 
arranged  that  even  those  who  had  no  means 
could  go  to  work  on  their  fields  and  find  sup¬ 
port  until  they  could  raise  a  crop.  As  making 
the  land  ready  for  cultivation  would  add  con¬ 
siderably  to  its  value,  it  was  arranged  that  the 
farmer  should  be  allowed  a  certain  amount  per 
acre,  to  be  paid  by  the  Commonwealth,  for  the 
land  he  cleared.  Then,  he  could  sell  to  the 
Commonwealth  for  shipment  to  England  all  the 
stave-bolts  and  charcoal  he  could  make  and  all 


104 


ARISTOPIA. 


the  sassafras  and  cedar  timber  lie  could  cut  oil 
his  land  and  bring1  to  the  river’s  edge.  Thus, 
while  clearing  his  field  he  could  be  earning  a 
living.  If  this  should  not  he  sufficient,  he 
was  to  have  some  credit  at  the  commonwealth 
store.  This  store  was  stocked  by  the  gover¬ 
nor  as  a  gift  to  the  commonwealth  to  begin 
with. 

In  the  last  cargo,  no  horses,  but  ten  yoke  of 
oxen  had  been  brought  over,  oxen  being  better 
adapted  for  rough  work  in  a  new  country 
than  horses,  as  well  as  being  cheaper  in 
price  and  less  expensive  to  feed.  Six  yoke 
were  sold,  one  to  each  farmer  who  was  able  to 
buy,  and  the  rest  were  kept  to  be  hired  to 
those  who  needed  to  use  them,  and  for  public 
use. 

Half  a  dozen  goats  were  brought  over.  It 
was  not  deemed  advisable  to  try  sheep-raising 
until  larger  clearings  should  be  made,  but  the 
bold  and  active  goats  could  avoid  and  beat  off 
the  wolves.  Some  young  pigs  and  some  geese 
and  ducks  were  also  brought  on  the  last  voy- 
age. 

As  it  was  observed  that  crops  did  not  grow 
at  the  extreme  edge  of  a  clearing,  Morton  per¬ 
suaded  the  farmers  to  make  their  clearings  four 


Am  STOP  I  A. 


105 


together,  each  four  at  the  place  where  the  cor¬ 
ners  of  their  four  lots  joined,  so  that  the  open 
spaces  would  be  larger  than  if  each  farmer 
made  a  separate  clearing.  Thus  also  four  men 
could  work  near  each  other  with  more  security 
against  savages. 

Charcoal  has  been  mentioned  as  one  of  the 
products  of  the  colonists.  Though  at  this  time 
pit  coal  (or  sea  coal,  as  it  was  then  called)  was 
considerably  used  in  London,  it  was  unpopular, 
and  its  use  had  been  prohibited  by  parliament. 
Charcoal  was  then  and  for  a  generation  later 
universally  used  for  smelting  iron.  W ood  was 
becoming  scarce  in  England,  and  timber  for 
shipbuilding  was  in  great  demand.  The  use 
of  any  wood  fit  for  shipbuilding  in  making 
charcoal  was  prohibited.  Under  these  circum¬ 
stances  charcoal  could  he  profitably  made  for 
export  by  the  colonists  of  Mortonia,  where 
wood  was  a  thing  to  be  gotten  rid  of  in  clear¬ 
ing  fields.  Some  men  skilled  in  making  char¬ 
coal  came  in  the  “  last  supply,”  and  the  art 
was  easily  learned  by  all. 

The  colonists  learned  from  the  Indians  to 
expedite  the  clearing  of  land  by  girdling  the 
large  trees :  that  is,  cutting  off  a  wide  ring  of 
bark  around  the  trunks.  A  well-girdled  tree 


106 


APIS  TOP  I  A. 


would  never  leaf  again,  and  in  a  few  years 
would  decay.  Through  its  bare  branches  the 
sunlight  and  air  could  come  to  the  growing 
crops  below.  But  the  colonists  saved  the  best 
of  the  large  trees  for  lumber,  girdling  only  the 
gnarly,  twisted,  and  unsound  ones. 

Within  two  weeks  of  her  arrival  in  Septem¬ 
ber  the  Flora  sailed  again  for  Europe.  Henry 
Morton  with  a  thousand  pounds  avoirdupois  of 
gold  went  in  her.  To  make  it  appear  that  the 
gold  came  from  Spanish  America,  the  Flora 
took  only  part  of  a  cargo  of  timber  and  some 
furs,  and  sailed  to  Cuba,  where  she  completed 
her  cargo  with  sugar  and  sailed  for  Amster¬ 
dam.  Ralph  Morton  sent  instructions  to  his 
agents  to  buy  immediately  four  more  ships  of 
not  less  than  two  hundred  tons  each,  or,  if 
they  could  not  be  bought  promptly,  to  charter 
them  until  that  number  could  be  bought.  Five 
more  of  three  hundred  tons  each  were  to  be 
built  on  a  model  furnished  by  Ralph  Morton 
himself.  They  were  to  be  considerably  longer 
and  lower  than  the  model  then  in  vogue. 
Thus  they  would  have  increased  capacity, 
would  pitch  less,  and  drift  less  to  seaward 
during  contrary  winds.  English  shipbuilders 
were  then  the  best  in  the  world,  and  they  were 


APISTOPIA. 


107 


rapidly  improving  both  in  the  workmanship 
and  size  of  their  vessels. 

James  Morton  was  to  make  his  headquarters 
in  Bristol,  then  the  second  city  in  England. 
Edward  Morton  was  to  go  to  Holland,  with 
headquarters  at  Amsterdam.  Numerous  agents 
were  to  be  appointed  to  procure  emigrants  in 
Holland,  Denmark,  and  Germany.  The  agents 
were  to  receive  a  premium  for  each  desirable 
emigrant  furnished,  and  suffer  a  penalty  for 
each  emigrant  they  sent  of  a  prohibited  class. 
No  criminals,  beggars,  or  habitual  paupers  were 
to  be  sent,  no  cripples  nor  permanent  invalids 
unless  they  belonged  to  the  family  of  some 
emigrant  to  Mortonia,  bound  for  their  support. 
No  person  over  fifty  years  old  would  be  ac¬ 
cepted  unless  such  person  was  the  parent  of 
some  emigrant  to  Mortonia  bound  to  the 
parent’s  support.  No  person  suffering  from, 
or  known  or  suspected  to  be  infected  with, 
smallpox  or  other  plague  was  to  be  shipped. 

There  were  at  that  time  in  Holland  a  number 
of  English  emigrants  called  Brownists,  who  had 
left  their  native  land  because  they  could  not 
make  all  England  adopt  their  religous  notions, 
and  had  been  roughly  used  for  their  sublime 
efforts  to  do  so.  Not  understanding  the  Dutch 


108 


ABISTOPIA. 


language,  they  could  not  hope  to  bring  the 
Dutch  nation  into  their  narrow  theological 
path,  so  they  lived  quietly  in  Holland,  a  little 
theocratic  community,  ruled  absolutely  by  their 
preachers  in  all  such  minor  matters  as  the 
rather  liberal  Dutch  government  did  not  med¬ 
dle  with.  Morton’s  agents  in  Holland  were 
instructed  not  to  send  any  of  these  men  to 
Mortonia,  as  the  governor  knew  well  what  fire¬ 
brands  they  would  be  in  his  colony. 

The  Indians  still  supplied  the  colonists  of 
Mortonia  with  most  of  their  meat.  It  was 
strictly  forbidden  to  private  members  of  the 
commonwealth  to  trade  with  the  Indians. 
Such  trading  was  to  be  done  by  the  officials 
and  public  storekeepers  as  public  business. 
Morton  adopted  the  close  dealing  of  Captain 
Smith  rather  than  the  lavish  prodigality  of 
Newport.  He  did  not  think  equity  required 
him  to  give  an  Indian  beads  which  cost  ten 
shillings  in  London  for  a  pelt  worth  ten  shil¬ 
lings  in  London,  or  anything  on  that  basis.  It 
was  sufficient  if  he  gave  the  Indian  for  the 
skin  what  the  savage  thought  the  skin  worth, 
in  beads  of  a  value  estimated  by  the  savage 
rather  than  by  the  white  man.  It  may  be 
thought  that  the  Indian  was  like  a  child  or  a 


ARISTOPIA. 


109 


weak-minded  person,  incapable  of  estimating 
values,  and  not  to  be  allowed  to  cheat  himself ; 
but  Morton  found  him  quite  shrewd  enough  in 
his  own  sphere,  and  knowing  quite  well  what  a 
thing  was  worth  to  himself,  if  he  did  not  know 
what  it  was  worth  to  the  white  man. 

At  the  approach  of  winter  great  numbers  of 
wild  geese  and  ducks  came  down  from  the 
north,  and  the  colonists  were  able  to  kill  a  great 
many  of  these  fowls.  They  found  also  in  this 
new  world  great  quantities  of  wild  fruits,  which 
added  much  zest  to  their  fare.  Beginning 
about  the  end  of  May,  there  were  strawberries, 
then,  in  succession,  dewberries,  raspberries, 
blackberries,  plums,  grapes,  and,  lastly,  persim¬ 
mons  (or  putchimins,  as  they  were  then  called), 
lasting  until  far  into  the  winter.  Nuts  in 
variety  were  also  plentiful. 

When  the  Flora  sailed  she  took  back  letters 
from  most  of  the  colonists  to  their  relatives  and 
friends  in  England.  .Few,  if  any,  failed  to 
extol  the  conditions  of  life  in  Mortonia  and 
urge  others  to  come. 

As  soon  as  possible,  the  governor  set  a 
number  of  men  at  work  to  build  a  mill.  It  was 
found  that  Bock  Creek  had  sufficient  volume 
and  fall  for  an  ordinary  mill,  and  that  one  could 


110 


AllISTOPIA. 


be  built  more  easily  here  than  on  the  river.  But 
Morton  intended  to  build  much  greater  mills, 
to  be  run  with  the  great  power  which  the  falls 
in  the  river  could  furnish.  The  mill  was  made 
both  for  grinding  grain  and  sawing  lumber. 
Saw-mills  were  then  unknown  in  England.  One 
which  was  built  near  London  in  1633  was  torn 
down  by  a  mob  of  workmen,  who  feared  that 
the  innovation  would  deprive  them  of  work. 
The  people  of  Mortonia,  however,  saw  such  a 
vast  amount  of  work  before  them  waiting  to  be 
done,  that  they  welcomed  any  help  from  water¬ 
power.  Morton  had  carefully  designed  the 
machinery  of  the  sawmill,  and  had  it  made  in 
England.  Soon  the  rocky  hills  of  the  lonely 
creek  resounded  with  the  hum  of  machinery 
and  the  growling  of  the  great  saw  tearing  its 
way  through  the  logs,  doing  the  work  of  many 
men  in  the  old  way.  The  contemplation  of 
this  work  afforded  the  liveliest  pleasure  to 
Ralph  Morton. 

In  March,  1611,  the  Flora  arrived  for  the 
third  time  at  Mortonia.  A  majority  of  the 
immigrants  she  brought  this  time  were  women 
and  children.  All  the  colonists  who  had  come 
on  the  other  two  trips  leaving  families  in  Eng¬ 
land  had  them  brought  out  on  the  third  voy- 


All  I  STOP  I  A. 


Ill 


age.  Also  some  unmarried  women  came,  some 
of  them  as  dependent  relatives  of  the  other  im¬ 
migrants,  others  induced  to  come  with  the 
understood  if  not  avowed  object  of  finding 
husbands  in  America. 

Soon  the  newly-acquired  ships  of  the  gov¬ 
ernor  began  to  arrive,  bringing  a  great  many 
immigrants.  With  increased  force,  men  were 
set  at  work  to  dig  a  long  mill-race,  bringing 
water  from  above  the  “  Little  Falls”  of  the 
Potomac  to  the  head  of  tide  water,  where,  with 
a  great  volume  and  ample  fall  of  water,  large 
saw-mills  were  built.  Logs  could  then  he  run 
down  the  river  from  above  by  the  current, 
brought  from  below  on  the  river  by  towing  or 
the  incoming  tide,  and  floated  out  of  Rock 
Creek.  Lumber  then  became  an  important 
article  of  export,  selling  at  a  good  profit  in  the 
English  markets  in  competition  with  hand- 
sawn  lumber.  It  was  more  than  thirty  years 
before  the  colonists  of  Mortonia  had  any  com¬ 
petition  in  mill-sawn  lumber,  and  then  it  came 
from  the  shrewd  Puritans  of  New  England. 

With  abundance  of  mill-sawn  lumber,  a  new 
style  of  architecture  replaced  the  log  cabins 
chinked  with  sticks  and  clay.  Frame  houses, 
much  better  looking  and  more  cleanly  than  the 


112 


Alt  IS  TO  PI  A. 


cabins,  became  the  ordinary  dwellings.  An 
improvement  in  dwellings  is  certain  to  improve 
the  character  of  a  people.  The  inside  walls  of 
these  houses  were  of  lath  and  plaster,  the  laths 
fastened  to  the  frame  with  pegs,  nails  being 
then  hand-made  and  expensive,  a  small  size 
costing  in  London  five-pence  a  hundred,  and 
five-pence  was  about  half  a  day’s  wages  of  the 
workman  who  made  them.  Nails  were  mostly 
made,  however,  by  women  and  children. 

In  Mortonia,  as  in  every  community  not 
purely  communistic,  a  currency  was  necessary, 
although  a  less  amount  was  necessary  in  Mor¬ 
tonia  than  in  other  communities  of  its  popula¬ 
tion,  owing  to  the  traffic  being  conducted  by 
the  public  agency.  The  colonists  could  take 
their  produce  to  the  stores  and  in  exchange  get 
credit  on  the  store  books,  on  which  they  could 
purchase  goods ;  but  still  some  money  was  nec¬ 
essary.  Morton  had  no  authority  to  coin 
money.  Partly  for  this  reason  and  partly  be¬ 
cause  he  had  some  ideas  of  his  own,  centuries 
ahead  of  his  age,  on  the  subject  of  currency, 
he  determined  to  make  money  of  paper  bills. 
He  saw  that  in  civilized  commerce  money  is 
only  a  set  of  counters  with  which  an  instanta¬ 
neous,  authentic,  and  indisputable  account  of 


ARISTOPIA. 


113 


exchanges  is  kept,  and  as  such  the  intrinsic 
value  of  the  material  is  of  no  consequence 
whatever,  except  as  a  guaranty  of  the  authen¬ 
ticity  of  the  counters.  If  such  authenticity 
could  be  attained  by  any  other  means  than  the 
intrinsic  value  of  the  materials,  the  object  of 
these  counters  would  be  equally  well  attained. 
The  use  of  mere  lumps  of  gold  and  silver,  in 
whatever  shape,  in  exchange  for  other  commo¬ 
dities,  is  simply  barbarous  barter,  not  civilized 
commerce.  The  use  of  a  well-authenticated 
paper  currency  would  render  possible  a  much 
needed  increase  in  the  volume  of  the  world’s 
currency.  The  great  amelioration  in  the  con¬ 
dition  of  the  people  of  Europe  which  took 
place  in  the  sixteenth,  and  was  still  taking 
place  in  the  seventeenth,  century,  was  attrib¬ 
uted  by  every  philosophical  man  to  the  increase 
of  the  volume  of  currency  by  the  influx  of  gold 
and  silver  from  America.  Buyers,  whether  of 
merchandise  or  human  labor,  grumbled  at  the 
rising  prices,  but  a  gleam  of  prosperity  was 
taking  the  place  of  the  night  of  abject  poverty 
among  the  common  people.  It  was  not  the 
natural  utility  of  gold  and  silver  that  did  the 
good  work,  for  as  metals  they  minister  little  to 

man’s  needs.  It  was  their  artificial  value  as 
3 


114 


ARISTOPIA. 


counters  in  a  game  which  could  not  well  or 
briskly  go  on  without  counters.  But  men 
were  in  danger  of  overlooking — and  did  over¬ 
look — the  fact  that  this  value  was  artificial, 
and  deluded  themselves  with  the  idea  that  it 
was  natural.  They  made  a  fetich  of  gold — a 
master,  not  a  servant,  of  society. 

Morton  decided  to  make  a  radical  change  in 
the  denominations  of  the  currency.  He  had 
often  noted  the  cumbrousness  of  accounts  in 
English  currency,  and  the  labor  of  making  cal¬ 
culations  in  it,  owing  to  the  irregular  ratio  of 
the  denominations  to  each  other.  He  conceived 
that  a  currency  in  which  the  denominations 
bore  a  decimal  ratio  to  each  other  would  render 
calculations  in  money  infinitely  easier.  Then, 
too,  the  English  pound  was  too  large  for  a 
unit,  and  the  shilling  was  too  small.  There 
was  in  circulation  in  European  commerce  a 
silver  coin  called  in  Dutch  and  Spanish  dciler , 
in  English  dollar .  Its  value  was  somewhat 
less  than  that  of  the  English  crown  or  five- 
shilling  piece.  This  was  a  convenient  size  for 
a  unit,  and  Morton  adopted  it  as  such.  The 
tenth  of  it  he  called  dima ,  from  the  Latin 
decima ,  and  the  hundredth  part  cent ,  from 
centum . 


ARISTOPIA. 


115 


Morton  thought  pieces  of  paper  currency  of 
less  than  half  a  dollar  would  be  inconvenient, 
while,  as  the  monetary  transactions  of  the  col¬ 
ony  were  not  large,  a  five-dollar  bill  would  be 
the  largest  needed,  with  one  dollar  and  two- 
dollar  pieces  between  the  extremes.  Before 
leaving  Europe  for  the  last  time  he  had  made 
arrangements  to  have  plates  engraved  for 
printing  bills  of  these  four  denominations. 
The  plates  for  the  backs  were  engraved  in 
Amsterdam,  and  those  for  the  faces  in  Ant¬ 
werp,  as  a  precaution  against  a  spurious  issue. 
The  bills,  in  numbers  as  needed,  were  printed 
in  Mortonia  under  the  supervision  of  the  gov¬ 
ernor,  and  signed  by  him  and  countersigned 
by  the  treasurer. 

Until  authority  was  obtained  to  coin  money, 
English  shillings,  sixpences,  and  copper  coins 
were  imported  and  used  for  change.  The  two 
kinds  of  currency  could  be  used  together  by 
counting  the  penny  as  two  cents,  and  twenty- 
four  pennies,  four  sixpences,  or  two  shillings  as 
half  a  dollar. 

Among  the  importations  in  the  spring  of 
1611  were  several  swarms  of  bees.  These 
multiplied  rapidly,  and  repaid  a  small  amount 
of  labor  with  a  large  amount  of  luxury.  Many 


116 


AB  IS  TOP  I  A. 


of  the  swarms  escaped  into  the  woods,  and  in 
after  years  the  frontiersmen  of  Virginia  were 
surprised  to  find  stores  of  honey  in  the  hollow 
trees  of  the  forest  solitudes. 

It  was  somewhat  difficult  for  ships  to  ascend 
the  Potomac  to  Mortonia,  although  the  river 
had  no  perceptible  current,  because,  if  the  wind 
was  not  quite  favorable,  very  short  tacks  had 
to  be  made.  To  remedy  this  evil  Ralph  Mor¬ 
ton  invented  a  vessel  propelled  by  horse¬ 
power.  The  hull  was  narrow  and  the  bows 
were  sharp.  The  lower  deck  projected  several 
feet  beyond  the  hull  on  both  sides  and  only 
about  two  feet  above  the  water,  as  it  was  not 
expected  to  encounter  large  waves.  Ten 
horses  hitched  to  the  outer  ends  of  long  sweeps 
supplied  the  power.  The  inner  ends  of  the 
sweeps  were  attached  to  a  cog-wheel  about  ten 
feet  in  diameter,  turning  horizontally.  This 
wheel  worked  in  small  co^-wheels  which 
turned  two  shafts  attached  to  a  large  paddle- 
wheel  on  each  side  of  the  vessel.  These  small 
cog-wheels  could  be  put  in  or  out  of  gear  so 
that  one  paddle  wheel  could  be  stopped  while 
the  other  was  turning,  thus  facilitating  the 
turning  of  the  vessel.  One  of  these  boats 
would  not  only  run  at  a  rapid  rate,  but  would 


ARISTOPIA. 


117 


tow  a  ship  up  or  down  the  river  against  wind 
and  tide  at  a  fair  rate.# 

What  gold  Ralph  Morton  needed  to  pay 
the  expenses  of  his  enterprise  was  taken  out  of 
the  mine  by  his  own  labor  and  that  of  his 
brothers.  To  lessen  this  labor  a  horse-power 
was  set  up  outside  of  the  building  which  en¬ 
closed  the  mouth  of  the  mine.  By  this  power 
were  run  drills  to  cut  holes  for  blasting, 
winches  to  raise  the  rock  and  metal  to  the 
surface,  and  saws  to  cut  the  metal  up  into 
pieces  small  enough  to  be  melted  in  crucibles. 
In  the  quartz  contiguous  to  the  mass  of  gold 
were  pieces  of  gold  so  small  that  Morton  did 
not  consider  it  worth  while  to  extract  them,  but 
so  large  as  to  be  readily  discerned.  If  these 
pieces  were  thrown  to  public  view,  public  dis¬ 
covery  of  the  mine  would  ensue.  So  a  build¬ 
ing  was  constructed  in  which  to  lock  the  tell¬ 
tale  pieces,  while  the  barren  pieces  of  quartz 
were  rolled  down  into  the  ravine. 

*  I  have  seen  a  ferryboat  which  ran  diagonally 
across  the  Mississippi,  a  distance  of  five  miles, 
driven  by  the  power  of  two  horses  in  a  tread-mill, 
make  good  speed  against  the  current.  Ten  horses 
on  sweeps  would  furnish  six  or  seven  times  the 
power  of  two  horses  on  a  tread-mill,  or  sufficient  to 
run  a  large  boat  against  a  current  of  four  or  five 
miles  an  hour  at  a  fair  speed. 


118 


AXIS  TOPI  A. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

With  ten  good  ships  bringing  over  immi¬ 
grants  who,  as  the  passage  was  free,  were 
readily  obtained  by  Ralph  Morton’s  active 
agents,  it  may  be  readily  seen  that  the  forty 
square  miles  or  less  of  Morton’s  grant  would 
in  a  very  few  years  overflow  with  inhabitants, 
most  of  whom  must  be  agriculturists.  The 
land  between  Rock  Creek  and  the  Eastern 
Branch  is  mostly  level  and  arable,  but  above 
Rock  Creek  much  of  the  surface  is  hilly  and 
stony.  Morton  intended  to  obtain  from  King 
James  a  charter  to  a  considerable  territory, 
buying  out  the  Virginia  Company’s  claim,  but 
was  waiting  for  a  favorable  time.  While 
waiting,  events  entirely  changed  the  direction 
in  which  he  intended  to  acquire  territory. 

Learning  from  a  Massawomek  whom  the 
whites  had  taken  prisoner  while  he,  with  a  war 
party,  was  on  a  raid  against  the  Nacotchtanks, 
that  beyond  the  mountains  to  the  west  was  a 


ARISTOPIA. 


119 


fair  country  with  a  very  large,  deep  river  flow¬ 
ing  for  an  unknown  distance  westward,  Ralph 
Morton  determined  to  learn  something  about 
the  region  and  the  river.  In  the  latter  part  of 
the  summer  of  1614  Henry  Morton  was  sent 
with  an  exploring  party  to  find  the  great 
river. 

In  about  two  months  he  returned  and  re¬ 
ported  that  he  had  followed  up  the  Potomac  to 
where  it  forked,  the  main  branch  coming  from 
the  south. 

Following  up  this  main  branch  for  a  day’s 
march,  and  finding  that  it  still  led  him  south¬ 
ward,  and  that  as  far  as  he  could  see  from  a 
high  hill  the  valley  trended  southward,  he  re¬ 
turned  to  the  forks  of  the  river  and  followed 
the  northern  fork  almost  to  its  source.  Then 
striking  westward,  he  passed  over  a  high 
plateau.  The  river  valley  had  made  for  the 
party  a  gateway  through  the  loftiest  ranges  of 
mountains.  He  crossed  three  streams,  of  con¬ 
siderable  size  but  not  navigable,  flowing  north¬ 
ward,  with  ranges  of  high  hills  between  them. 
At  last  he  came  to  the  great  river.  It  was 
several  hundred  yards  wide,  and  deep  enough 
for  large  vessels.  It  flowed  towards  the  south¬ 
west.  From  what  he  could  gather  from  the 


120 


AlilSTOPIA. 


Indians  (he  had  picked  up  considerable  of  the 
language  of  the  Massawomeks)  the  name  of 
the  river  was  Ohio.  He  had  seen  a  good  deal 
of  fine  agricultural  country,  but  more  that  was 
hilly  or  mountainous. 

From  this  account,  Ralph  Morton  determined 
to  explore  the  great  river  himself.  In  the 
latter  part  of  March,  1615,  Henry  Morton  was 
again  sent  out  with  a  party,  including  some 
boat-builders.  They  took  a  number  of  pack- 
mules  loaded  with  provisions  and  tools.  Henry 
Morton  was  instructed  to  build  on  the  banks 
of  the  Ohio  a  strong  log-house  as  a  defense 
against  Indians,  saw  lumber,  and  build  two 
flat  boats. 

About  a  month  after  Henry’s  departure, 
Ralph  set  out  with  another  party,  following  the 
well-marked  trail  of  the  first  party  after  leaving 
the  Potomac.  Arriving  at  the  Ohio,  Ralph 
found  the  house  built  and  the  boats  nearing 
completion.  When  the  boats  were  finished,  he 
selected  a  party  of  twelve  men,  and  embarked, 
taking  along  three  pack-mules,  and  leaving 
several  men  at  the  block-house  commanded  by 
Henry  Morton. 

The  little  party  descended  the  great  river 
with  the  current,  using  their  oars  only  to  k§ep 


ARISTOPIA. 


121 


in  the  current.  They  kept  to  the  river  every 
night,  except  when  it  was  foggy,  taking  turns 
on  the  watch.  They  landed,  when  practicable,, 
on  islands,  to  cook  their  meals,  allow  the  mules 
to  graze,  and  gather  some  grass  for  them. 
Some  bales  of  husks  had  been  brought  along 
for  fodder.  For  the  food  of  the  men  they  had 
a  supply  of  corn-meal  and  sea-biscuit,  using 
the  meal  first,  and  saving  the  biscuit  for  their 
land  journey.  They  managed  to  kill  a  fair 
supply  of  game,  which  they  found  very  tame 
in  these  green  solitudes. 

Ralph  Morton  had  with  him  instruments  for 
taking  observations,  and  had  sufficient  skill  in 
mathematics  to  determine  latitude  and  longi¬ 
tude.  The  latitude  and  longitude  of  principal 
points  and  of  the  mouths  of  all  large  tribu¬ 
taries  of  the  Ohio  were  determined. 

Floating  thus  down  the  smooth  current 
along  a  broad  and  beautiful  valley  for  two 
weeks,  the  party  came  to  where  the  clear 
waters  of  the  Ohio  flowed  out  into  a  mighty 
stream  whose  waters  were  turbid  with  yellow 
mud.  It  was  not  so  broad  as  the  Potomac  in 
its  lower  course,  but  the  strong  current  told 
that  the  volume  of  water  was  vastly  greater 
than  that  of  the  Potomac.  Morton  had  no 


122 


ARISTOPIA. 


doubt  that  this  vast  river  was  the  Mesashapi 
(which  he  afterwards  spelled  Misisipi)  which 
De  Soto  had  explored,  and  beneath  whose 
waters  he  had  been  laid  seventy-three  years 
before.  The  account  of  the  expedition  of  De 
Soto  had  thrilled  Ralph  when,  as  a  schoolboy, 
he  had  first  read  it  in  learning  Spanish. 

Morton  thought  it  not  best  to  descend  the 
Misisipi.  The  land  at  the  junction  of  the  two 
rivers  was  too  swampy  for  a  landing,  so  the 
party  pulled  the  boats  up  the  Misisipi  till  they 
found  high  grounds  on  the  eastern  bank, 
where  they  disembarked.  The  boats  were 
sunk  in  the  mouth  of  a  small  creek  to  preserve 
them  for  possible  further  need.  Then  the 
pack-mules  were  loaded  and  the  party  set  out 
by  land  due  northward. 

For  a  day  or  two  they  traveled  through  a 
rolling:  region  with  considerable  timber.  Then 
they  came  out  upon  vast,  grassy,  treeless  plains 
the  like  of  which  they  had  never  seen  nor 
heard  of.  The  party  traveled  northward  about 
a  hundred  and  fifty  miles,  and  then  turned 
eastward.  Traveling  about  eighty  miles,  they 
came  to  a  considerable  river  flo wing- southward. 
From  its  position  Morton  judged  it  to  be  one 
whose  mouth  he  had  noted  while  descending 


ARISTOPIA. 


123 


the  Ohio — the  Wabash.  The  valley  of  this 
river  was  considerably  timbered.  Some  dis¬ 
tance  eastward  of  this  river  they  entered  a 
forest  region  again. 

On  this  journey  they  saw  immense  herds  of 
bison  or  buffalo — a  constant  wonder  to  them. 
They  killed  as  many  of  the  beasts  as  they 
wished.  They  met  a  few  parties  of  Indians, 
but  with  such  tact  did  Morton  treat  them — a 
mingled  firmness  and  friendliness,  and  an  over¬ 
awing  air  of  superiority — that  not  once  did  the 
savages  venture  to  attack  them.  Some  light 
tents  were  brought  along  on  the  pack-mules, 
constructed  of  thin  cloth  made  waterproof,  for 
shelter  on  rainy  nights.  Such  careful  provi¬ 
sion  had  been  made  that  for  these  strong  and 
hardy  men  the  journey  presented  hardly  a  dis¬ 
comfort. 

When  the  party  had  proceeded  eastward 
until  Morton,  from  his  observations,  deemed 
they  were  not  far  west  of  their  station  on  the 
Ohio,  they  turned  southward  until  they  struck 
the  river.  Ascending  it,  they  soon  saw,  as 
they  came  around  a  bend,  the  red-cross  flag 
floating  over  the  block-house  on  the  opposite 
shore  far  up  the  river.  It  was  a  sight  which 
made  the  blood  dance  in  their  veins  and  their 


124 


ARISTOPIA. 


hats  go  up  with  huzzas.  It  was  like  getting 
home  again.  Arriving  opposite  the  house,  the 
party  was  soon  discovered  by  their  comrades 
at  the  station,  and  a  small  boat  was  sent  to 
ferry  them  across.  It  took  several  trips  to 
bring*  them  over.  The  mules  swam  with  their 
heads  supported  in  the  boat. 

Kalph  Morton  found  that  the  party  at  the 
house  had  been  carefully  managed  in  his  ab¬ 
sence.  No  collisions  with  the  Indians  had  oc¬ 
curred,  and  a  considerable  quantity  of  furs  had 
been  collected  by  trade.  Loading  these  furs 
on  the  animals,  several  of  which  had  been  left 
at  the  station,  the  tools  were  left  in  the  house, 
which  was  locked  up  and  then  abandoned ;  and 
the  united  party,  about  twenty-five  strong,  set 
out  for  Mortonia,  which  they  reached  without 
the  loss  of  a  man  in  the  whole  expedition. 

From  the  time  Henry  Morton  returned  from 
his  first  expedition  beyond  the  mountains,  the 
governor  began  to  change  his  plans  as  to  the 
territory  he  should  acquire  by  charter,  and  his 
determination  was  fixed  by  what  he  saw  on  his 
long  journey.  At  first  he  intended  to  obtain 
a  charter  for  the  territory  bounded  on  the  east 
by  the  Chesapeake  Bay,  on  the  north  by  the 
fortieth  parallel,  and  on  the  south  and  west 


ARISTOPIA . 


125 


by  the  Potomac.  But  he  reflected  that  this 
region  was  too  much  exposed  to  observation 
from  England.  He  wished  to  make  radical 
changes  in  government,  and  needed  a  degree 
of  independence  he  could  not  have  under  the 
eye  of  king  and  parliament  and  exposed  to 
their  interference.  He  thought  it  quite  prob¬ 
able  that  some  time  he  might  have  to  make 
forcible  resistance  to  royal  or  parliamentary 
interference,  and  he  did  not  wish  for  his  theater 
a  region  exposed  to  the  broadsides  of  the  royal 
navy.  He  determined  at  last  that  the  bulk  of 
his  new  nation  should  lie  beyond  the  mountains, 
where  he  could  veil  his  operations  from  the 
jealous  powers  of  England.  One  port  he 
wanted,  accessible  from  the  ocean.  Mortonia 
was  just  the  place.  The  water  was  deep 
enough,  but  the  channel  so  narrow  that  batteries 
on  the  shore  could  defend  the  place  against  a 
navy.  He  would  acquire  a  narrow  belt  of  land 
along  the  Potomac  from  Mortonia  to  the  river’s 
source,  which  would  afford  a  pathway  from 
the  port  to  his  transmontan e  realm.  There 
was  something  in  the  idea  of  establishing  this 
empire  in  the  heart  of  the  great  virgin  con¬ 
tinent  which  appealed  so  strongly  to  the  ardent 
imagination  of  Ralph  Morton  that  he  did  not 


126 


ARISTOPIA. 


want  to  spend  his  life  waiting  for  the  peopling 
of  the  Atlantic  coast  before  seeing  the  tide  of 
empire  pouring  over  the  mountains  and  down 
the  great  river  of  the  interior. 


ABIST0P1A. 


127 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

Very  soon  after  returning  from  his  explor¬ 
ing  expedition  Ralph  Morton  embarked  for 
London.  Arriving  there,  he  first  went  to  the 
officers  of  the  Virginia  Company  and,  after  a 
long  negotiation  with  them,  obtained  a  grant 
of  land  extending  along  the  Potomac  from  the 
Eastern  Branch  to  the  source  of  the  river,  and 
five  miles  in  width,  paying  twenty  thousand 
pounds  for  it.  The  company  had  expended 
much  on  the  Virginia  colony  and  received  but  a 
trifling  sum  in  return.  Such  was  the  character 
of  the  colonists  and  the  incredible  folly  of  the 
officials  that  the  colony  was  still  suffering 
what  Captain  Smith  called  “  strange  miracles 
of  misery.”  Morton’s  grant  could  have  been 
obtained  for  much  less  money  if  the  company 
had  not  still  been  haunted  by  the  illusion  of 
Virginia’s  gold — gold  of  which  they  never  saw 
an  ounce  except  Morton’s  twenty  thousand 
bright  sovereigns,  and  those  he  had  paid  the 
company  for  the  first  grant. 


128  ' 


ARISTOPIA. 


The  grant  obtained,  Morton  sought  the 
king.  A  new  favorite,  young  George  Vil- 
liers,  was  now  nearest  the  royal  ear,  and 
though  receiving  much  of  the  royal  bounty, 
was  greedy  for  more  gold.  A  handsome  pres¬ 
ent  from  Morton  engaged  him  to  induce  the 
king’s  favorable  notice  of  Morton’s  proposition 
to  obtain  a  charter.  James  was  in  great  need 
of  money.  Parliament,  stingy  even  to  the  im¬ 
perious  Elizabeth,  before  whom  the  Commons 
crouched,  withheld  all  supplies  from  the  timid 
James,  except  on  such  conditions  that  he 
loathed  to  ask  money  of  the  Commons  he  de¬ 
spised.  Morton  was  well  aware  of  all  this,  and 
he  boldly  demanded  terms  in  his  charter  which 
seemed,  when  demanded  by  an  obscure  young 
man,  little  less  than  presumptuous.  But 
James,  priding  himself  on  his  royal  power, 
thought  it  no  less — rather  more — an  exhibition 
of  that  power  to  create  a  vice-king  in  a  new 
world  out  of  an  obscure  gentleman  than  out  of 
a  great  noble.  And  then,  a  man  who  could 
deliver  a  hundred  thousand  pounds  sterling  of 
gold  was  well  worthy  even  of  a  king’s  respect. 

Morton  had  less  trouble  in  getting  the  exten¬ 
sive  powers  of  government  he  sought  than  in 
obtaining;  some  smaller  matters.  The  king*  of 

o  o 


ARISTOPIA. 


129 


Spain  had  since  the  time  of  Columbus  exacted 
one-fifth  of  all  the  gold  and  silver  discovered 
in  his  American  dominions,  and  Elizabeth  had 
done  the  same  with  hers.  James  had  a  good 
deal  of  respect  for  Elizabeth,  but  vastly  more 
for  the  king  of  Spain,  and  thought  his  exam¬ 
ple  should  he  followed.  But  finally  Morton 
evaded  this  condition  by  proposing,  as  if  boast¬ 
fully,  to  yield  the  royal  treasury  from  his  col¬ 
ony  double  the  amount  of  gold  yielded  each 
year  by  the  four  times  broader  colony  of  Vir¬ 
ginia.  J ames  had  never  seen  an  ounce  of  gold 
from  Virginia,  hut  esteeming  himself  very 
shrewd,  thought  that  the  reckless  young  man’s 
proposal  offered  an  advantage,  and  the  royal 
trader  closed  with  it.  It  is  needless  to  say  that 
Morton  never  had  to  pay  James  nor  any  of  his 
successors  an  ounce  of  gold  on  this  condition 
in  his  charter. 

When  it  came  to  the  name  of  the  colony, 
James  was  about  to  propose  a  name  in  honor 
of  some  member  of  the  royal  family,  but  Mor¬ 
ton  desired  the  name  “  Aristopia  ” — the  best 
place — to  which  the  royal  scholar  assented. 

The  South  Virginia  Company  had  a  charter 

for  the  region  extending  from  the  thirty-fourth 

to  the  fortieth  parallel  and  one  hundred  miles 
9 


130 


ARISTOPIA. 


from  the  coast.  Ralph  Morton  asked  a  char¬ 
ter  for  the  region  (besides  the  five-mile  belt 
along  the  Potomac  from  the  Eastern  Branch 
to  the  source  of  the  river)  extending  from  the 
thirty-eighth  to  the  forty-first  parallel,  and 
from  the  crest  of  the  highest  range  of  the 
mountains  of  Virginia  to  the  South  Sea.  This 
range,  Morton  assured  the  king,  was  more 
than  a  hundred  and  fifty  miles  from  the  coast. 
The  American  continent  was  then  thought  by 
the  English  to  be  very  narrow,  and  the  South 
Sea  not  very  far  beyond  the  mountains.  Mor¬ 
ton  had  taken  care  that  no  account  of  his  ex¬ 
pedition  beyond  the  mountains  should  be  sent 
to  England.  In  view  of  the  fact  that  the  ex- 
plorations  of  De  Soto  along  the  lower  Missis¬ 
sippi  and  of  Coronado  and  Cabeza  de  Valca  in 
New  Mexico  had  long  been  published,  it  is  dif¬ 
ficult  to  understand  how  the  English  notion 
of  the  narrowness  of  the  American  continent 
could  survive,  as  it  did.  Powhatan  repeatedly 
told  John  Smith  that  the  stories  of  the  great 
salt  sea  beyond  the  mountains  were  lies.  How 
could  a  mind  at  all  philosophical  suppose  that 
so  great  a  river  as  the  historians  of  De  Soto’s 
expedition  described  could  be  collected  in  a 
very  narrow  continent?  More  than  one  Eng- 


ARTSTOPIA. 


131 


lish  navigator  had  seen  the  vast  volume  of  fresh 
water  poured  down  by  the  St.  Lawrence,  which 
any  schoolboy  should  have  known  could  be 
drained  only  from  a  great  continent.  The  In¬ 
dians  in  the  vicinity  of  the  first  English  settle¬ 
ment  at  Roanoke,  seeing  the  Englishmen  very 
desirous  of  finding  two  things :  gold  and  the 
South  Sea,  told  them,  with  the  design  of  send¬ 
ing  them  off  on  a  wild-goose  chase  from  which 
they  might  never  return,  that  Roanoke  River 
rose  in  a  region  full  of  gold;  and  that  its 
source  was  a  fountain  so  near  the  South  Sea 
that  the  spray  of  the  ocean  dashed  into  the 
fountain.  And  this  story  was  believed  in  Eng¬ 
land.  So  many  wonders  had  been  found  in 
the  new  world  that  it  seemed  not  incredible 
that  a  river  should  rise  a  few  rods  from  the 
Pacific  and  flow  into  the  Atlantic ;  or  that  a 
vast  stream  of  fresh  water  could  flow  with  a 
strong  current  from  one  salt  sea  into  another. 

The  boundaries  asked  for  by  Morton  were 
granted,  with  the  proviso  that  if  the  crest  of 
the  main  range  of  mountains  was  not  a  hundred 
and  fifty  miles  from  the  Atlantic,  then  the 
eastern  boundary  of  Aristopia  should  be  a  line 
parallel  with  Atlantic  coast  and  one  hundred 
and  fifty  miles  from  it. 


/ 


132 


A  R  IS  TOPI  A 


The  charter  was  drawn  up  in  Latin.  The 
preamble,  or  a  translation  of  it,  read  thus : 

“  Whereas,  our  well-beloved  and  right  trusty 
subject,  Ralfe  Morton,  gent.,  of  the  county  of 
Kent,  in  our  said  kingdom  of  England,  being 
animated  by  a  laudable  and  pious  zeal  for  ex¬ 
tending  the  Christian  religion,  and  also  the 
territories  of  our  empire,  hath  humbly  besought 
leave  of  us  that  he  may  transport,  by  his  own 
industry  and  expense,  a  numerous  colony  of 
the  English  nation,  to  a  certain  region,  herein¬ 
after  described,  in  a  country  hitherto  unculti¬ 
vated,  in  the  parts  of  America  now  partly  oc¬ 
cupied  by  savages,  who  have  no  knowledge  of 
the  Divine  Being,  and  in  all  that  region,  with 
certain  privileges  and  jurisdictions  appertain¬ 
ing  unto  the  wholesome  government  and  state 
of  his  colony  and  region  aforesaid,  may  by  our 
royal  highness  be  given,  granted,  and  confirmed 
unto  him  and  his  heirs.” 

Morton  and  his  heirs  and  successors  were 
constituted  absolute  lords  and  proprietaries  of 
the  region,  to  be  held  under  the  allegiance  due 
to  the  king,  in  free  and  common  socage,  by 
fealty  only,  and  not  in  cajiite,  nor  by  knight’s 
service,  “  yielding  therefore  unto  us,  our 
heirs  and  successors,  two  Indian  arrows  of 


ARISTOPIA. 


133 


those  parts,  to  be  delivered  at  the  said  castle  o£ 
Windsor,  every  year,  on  Tuesday  in  Easter 
week;  and  also  of  the  gold  and  silver  ore 
which  shall  happen  from  time  to  time  to  be 
found  within  the  aforesaid  limits,  so  much  as 
shall  be  double  the  amount  of  the  fifth  part 
of  all  gold  and  silver  ore  discovered  in  our 
royal  province  of  Virginia.”  Morton’s  pro¬ 
prietorship  was  of  the  soil,  mines,  forests, 
waters,  and  the  fish  in  them. 

Morton  was  to  have  in  the  province  religious 
power,  u  as  any  Bishop  of  Durham  within  the 
bishopric  or  county  palatine  of  Durham,” 
which  was  certainly  extensive  enough. 

Morton  and  his  heirs  and  successors  were 
given  power  to  make  laws  with  the  advice, 
assent,  and  approbation  of  the  freemen  of  the 
province  or  their  delegates  or  deputies,  and 
ordinances  for  cases  of  emergency,  66  so,  never¬ 
theless,  that  the  laws  and  ordinances  afore¬ 
said  be  consonant  to  reason,  and  be  not 
repugnant  or  contrary  to,  but  (so  far  as  con¬ 
veniently  may  be)  agreeable  to  the  laws,  stat¬ 
utes,  customs,  and  rights  of  this  our  kingdom 
of  England.” 

Owing  to  the  dangers  which  might  suddenly 
arise  in  so  remote  a  province,  from  savages, 


134 


ARISTOPIA. 


pirates,  and  other  enemies,  Morton,  his  suc¬ 
cessors,  and  their  lieutenants  were  to  have 
power  to  exercise  martial  law  and  military 
power  u  as  full  and  unrestrained  as  any  captain- 
general  of  an  army  hath  or  ever  hath  had.” 

To  facilitate  the  peopling  of  the  province, 
it  was  provided  that  all  persons  except  those 
expressly  forbidden  should  he  free  to  emigrate 
to  the  province.  The  inhabitants  of  the  prov¬ 
ince  were  to  have  all  the  privileges  and  rights 
of  the  subjects  residing  in  England.  They 
were  to  have  the  right  to  trade  with  all  nations, 
and  were  to  be  burdened  with  no  more  customs 
duties  than  the  other  subjects  of  the  kingdom 
of  England. 

Morton  was  to  have  power  to  establish  ports 
of  entry  and  levy  import  duties. 

Morton  and  his  heirs  were  to  have  power  to 
convey  “  what  estate  of  inheritance  soever,  in 
fee  simple  or  fee  tail,  or  otherwise,  as  to  them 
shall  seem  expedient.” 

He  was  empowered  to  coin  money  of  gold, 
silver,  and  copper,  the  gold  and  silver  coins  to 
be  of  the  same  fineness  as  those  of  the  Eng¬ 
lish  mint. 

He  was  empowered  to  grant  titles  of  nobility, 
provided  they  were  not  the  same  as  the  titles 


ARISTOPIA. 


135 


of  any  of  the  nobility  of  Great  Britain  or 
Ireland. 

It  was  provided  that  the  new  province  should 
not  be  held  or  reputed  a  part  of,  or  subordinate 
to,  the  land  of  Virginia,  or  any  other  colony 
alread  transported,  or  thereafter  to  he  trans¬ 
ported. 

It  may  well  be  supposed  that  when  Ralph 
Morton  gazed  upon  the  fair  and  ample  parch¬ 
ment,  with  its  broad  red  seal,  giving  him  such 
vast,  almost  royal  powers,  his  heart  swelled 
with  exultation. 


136 


ARISTOPIA . 


CHAPTER  XI Y. 

From  the  time  Henry  Morton  returned  from 
his  first  exploring  expedition  beyond  the  mount¬ 
ains  the  immigrants,  already  overflowing  the 
five-mile  radius  around  Mortonia,  were  directed 
up  the  Potomac  to  form  new  settlements ;  and 
when  the  governor  returned  from  England 
the  outmost  settlement  wras  more  than  forty 
miles  above  Mortonia.  Now  they  were  ex¬ 
tended  still  more  rapidly,  for  Morton  acquired 
new  vessels  and  extended  his  agencies  in 
Europe. 

The  object  was  to  push  beyond  the  mount¬ 
ains,  and  small  settlements  were  made  along 
the  Potomac  a  few  miles  apart,  located  at 
places  where  the  best  agricultural  land  was 
found.  These  settlements  were  made  as  com¬ 
pact  as  possible  for  safety  from  the  savages, 
and  each  contained  a  strong  block-house  and 
stockade,  with  two  or  three  small  pieces  of 
artillery.  Each  settlement  consisting  of  twenty- 
five  or  thirty  families  constituted  a  township. 


ARISTOPIA. 


137 


with  its  local  government  of  three  supervisors, 
town  clerk,  justice  of  the  peace,  and  constable. 
In  each  was  located  a  store  of  the  common¬ 
wealth.  Each  had  its  school  and  school 
officers.  For  teachers  of  these  schools  young 
women  were  brought  from  England,  scions  of 
u gentle”  but  impoverished  families  who  pre¬ 
ferred  comino;  to  America  to  the  slavish  life 
of  a  dependant  or  governess  for  some  ill- 
tempered  woman  of  rank  or  wealth. 

Good  roads  were  made  to  connect  the  settle¬ 
ments.  The  burden  of  making  these  roads 
was  not  laid  upon  the  settlements,  but  the 
work  was  done  by  a  body  of  laborers  in  the 
employ  of  the  commonwealth,  although  really 
paid  by  the  governor.  Signals  were  arranged, 
to  consist  of  three  reports  of  a  cannon,  to  give 
warning  of  an  attack  upon  any  settlement. 
At  this  signal  the  people  were  to  retire  to  the 
forts  and  the  attacked  settlement  was  to  re¬ 
ceive  all  possible  succor  from  its  neighbors. 
No  hostilities  with  the  Indians  had  yet  occurred, 
but  the  settlers  were  warned  not  to  put  any 
trust  in  the  savages  which  might  some  time 
prove  fatal.  At  the  same  time,  the  Indians 
were  treated  with  justice  and  friendliness. 
Such  land  as  the  settlers  of  Aristopia  needed 


138 


ARISTOPIA. 


was  bought  of  the  Indians  at  prices  satis¬ 
factory  to  the  latter. 

It  was  not  long  before  the  chain  of  settle¬ 
ments  extended  from  Mortonia  bey  ond  the  high 
plateau  forming  the  watershed  between  the  Po¬ 
tomac  and  the  streams  which  flow  northward 
into  the  Ohio,  and  descended  to  those  streams. 
It  was  now  decided  to  prepare  to  remove  the  capi¬ 
tal  of  Aristopia  from  Mortonia  to  a  point  beyond 
the  mountains.  A  new  city  (named  Morgania  in 
honor  of  a  prominent  official  of  the  colony)  was 
laid  out  on  the  middle  one  of  the  three  large 
streams  between  the  head  of  the  Potomac  and 
the  Ohio.  At  this  site  was  a  fine  waterfall  with 
an  ample  volume  of  water  to  turn  many  mill¬ 
wheels.  The  valley  was  broad  and  fertile  enough 
to  support  a  large  agricultural  population.  The 
ranges  of  mountains,  or  hills,  which  bounded 
the  valley  were  full  of  iron  ore  and  coal, 
although  the  value  of  the  latter  was  little 
known  at  that  time.  But  there  was  timber 
enough  to  make  charcoal  to  smelt  iron  for  a 
nation. 

Soon  after  the  site  of  this  future  capital 
was  laid  out  and  its  settlement  begun,  a  chain 
of  trading-posts  from  the  Ohio  to  the  great 
river  was  established.  The  first  one,  called 


ARISTOPIA. 


139 


Onondio,  was  situated  on  the  southeastern 
hank  of  the  Ohio,  at  the  mouth  of  a  large 
creek  in  latitude  39°  40'.  The  second  was  on 
the  same  side  of  the  Ohio,  at  the  mouth  of  a 
river  afterward  called  the  Little  Kanawha.  The 
third  was  at  the  mouth  of  the  Great  Kanawha 
River.  The  fourth  was  on  the  north  bank  of 
the  Ohio  at  the  mouth  of  a  river  called  the 
Scioto.  The  fifth  was  at  a  very  beautiful 
location  on  the  north  bank  of  the  Ohio,  about 
a  hundred  miles  below  the  mouth  of  the  Scioto, 
and  opposite  the  mouth  of  a  considerable  river 
coming  in  on  the  south  side  of  the  Ohio.  The 
sixth  was  about  a  hundred  and  twenty  miles 
farther  down  the  river  than  the  fifth.  At 
this  point  were  rapids  in  the  river,  which  con¬ 
siderably  impeded  navigation.  The  seventh  was 
near  the  mouth  of  the  W abash  River.  As  the 
ground  at  the  mouth  of  the  Ohio  was  unfit  for 
settlement  and  the  point  was  considerably 
without  the  chartered  limits  of  Aristopia,  no 
post  was  established  there.  The  eighth  post 
was  established  on  the  eastern  bank  of  the 
Misashapi  (Mississippi)  about  one  hundred  and 
fifty  miles  (by  the  river)  above  the  mouth  of 
the  Ohio  and  near  the  mouth  of  a  considerable 
river.  This  post  was  named  from  the  river, 


140 


ARISTOPIA. 


Kaskaskia.  Another  post,  established  a  hun¬ 
dred  miles  farther  up  the  great  river,  on  the 
western  bank,  on  a  high  and  commanding 
place,  was  called  Carondolet.  Some  twenty 
miles  above  the  last  post,  the  explorers  found  an¬ 
other  mighty  river  pouring  a  turbid  flood  into 
the  Misashapi  on  the  western  side.  These  posts 
were  situated  near  the  mouths  of  rivers  nav¬ 
igable  for  long  distances  by  Indian  canoes. 
Facilities  were  thus  given  to  the  Indians  for 
bringing  in  from  an  immense  region  their  furs 
and  peltries  to  trade.  Thus  the  fur  trade 
of  Aristopia  soon  came  to  exceed  that  of 
Canada.  Although  the  furs  were  not  quite  so 
good  as  those  of  more  northern  latitudes,  the 
skins  intended  for  leather,  as  those  of  the  deer 
and  elk,  were  of  the  best,  while  in  the  matter 
of  buffalo  skins  Aristopia  had  almost  a  mono- 
poly. 

As  a  means  of  communication  between  these 
posts  horse-boats  were  built,  three  or  four  of 
which  plied  between  Onondio  on  the  upper  Ohio, 
and  the  post  at  the  mouth  of  the  Wabash. 
From  this  post  to  Kaskaskia  the  communica¬ 
tion  was  overland,  and  the  distance  about  a 
hundred  miles,  mostly  over  a  prairie  region. 
One  horse-boat  plied  between  Kaskaskia  and 


ABISTOPIA. 


141 


Carondolet  on  the  great  river.  As  the  people 
at  the  posts  raised  their  own  corn  and  vegeta¬ 
bles,  there  was  no  great  bulk  of  goods  to  be 
brought  to  them,  and  as  they  had  only  furs  and 
peltries  to  ship  away,  there  was  no  great  weight 
to  export,  so  that  frequent  trips  were  not  nec¬ 
essary. 

Though  the  colonists  of  Aristopia  were  not 
allowed  to  furnish  the  Indians  firearms  or 
other  deadly  weapons,  they  rendered  them  great 
assistance  in  getting  furs  and  peltries  by  fur¬ 
nishing  them  steel  traps. 

When  civilized  people  are  brought  into  close 
contact  with  barbarism,  as  were  the  first  Euro¬ 
pean  settlers  of  America,  there  is  a  great  temp¬ 
tation  with  many  of  them  to  plunge  into  that 
barbarism  and  themselves  become  semi-barbaric. 
This  was  notably  the  case  with  a  large  portion 
of  the  settlers  of  Virginia.  They  did  not  con¬ 
gregate  in  communities  and  build  towns,  but 
scattered  out  on  separate  plantations.  Very 
many  of  the  younger  sons  of  English  u  gentle  ” 
families,  and  many  disbanded  soldiers,  unused 
to  manual  labor,  but  attracted  by  the  free  life 
of  the  new  world,  settled  on  the  frontiers  of 
the  colony,  and,  raising  only  an  acre  or  two  of 
corn,  depended  for  the  rest  of  their  subsistence 


142 


ABISTOPIA. 


on  hunting  and  fishing,  and  procuring  the  few 
necessaries  of  civilized  commerce  with  peltries, 
the  spoils  of  their  guns  and  traps.  With  the 
advance  of  settlement  these  men  and  their  de¬ 
scendants,  frontier  life  having  become  a  pas¬ 
sion  with  them,  pushed  on  to  new  frontiers. 
Though  such  a  life  produced  a  race  of  men 
with  some  prominent  virtues,  among  them  great 
courage  and  self-reliance,  yet  it  tended  to  a  mode 
of  living  not  much  above  barbarism.  Such  a 
life  appeared  to  Ralph  Morton  very  undesirable, 
and  he  labored  to  keep  his  people  out  of  it  and  in 
a  state  of  civilization  even  superior  to  that  of 
Europe.  Therefore  he  labored  to  keep  the  set¬ 
tlements  compact  and  prevent  straggling  in  the 
march  of  empire.  The  few  in  whom  the  desire 
to  plunge  into  barbarism  seemed  irrepressible 
were  selected  to  man  the  distant  trading-posts. 
Most  of  these  men  took  Indian  wives ;  and  their 
children,  although  having  some  undesirable 
characteristics,  formed  a  medium  between  the 
two  races  by  no  means  without  its  value  to  the 
colony. 

With  a  view  to  facilitate  as  much  as  possi¬ 
ble  communication  and  commerce  between  the 
transmontane  country  and  the  sea,  the  gover¬ 
nor  bravely  undertook  the  work  of  construct- 


AEISTOPIA. 


143 


ing  a  navigable  canal  from  Mortonia  to  a  point 
near  the  head  of  the  Potomac,  paying  most  of 
the  expense  from  his  private  means.  In  about 
two  years  the  canal  was  constructed  to  a  point 
above  the  “  Great  Falls.”  Although  this  ad¬ 
vanced  navigation  little  more  than  ten  miles,  it 
was  very  beneficial  by  bringing  down  to  Mor- 
tonia  a  great  flow  of  water  with  all  the  fall 
needed  to  run  many  mills,  as  at  the  upper  edge 
of  Mortonia  the  canal  was  more  than  thirty 
feet  above  the  surface  of  the  river.  From  this 
point  it  was  conducted  down  to  tide  level  by  a 
series  of  locks.  This  section  of  the  canal 
first  completed  offered  much  greater  difficulties 
that  any  section  of  equal  length  subsequently 
constructed,  as  twenty  locks  were  needed  in 
ten  miles.  The  mills  at  Mortonia  contained 
not  only  great  saws  for  cutting  planks  from 
logs,  but  smaller  saws  and  lathes  for  cutting 
timber  into  all  shapes  for  all  sorts  of  man¬ 
ufactures.  Thus,  by  the  aid  of  water-power 
handles  were  made  for  all  sorts  of  tools,  hubs 
and  other  parts  of  wagons,  furniture,  etc.  Fur¬ 
niture  could  be  shipped  to  England  and  Hol¬ 
land  and  sold  at  a  good  profit,  the  separate 
pieces,  packed  closely,  to  be  put  together,  pol¬ 
ished,  and  painted  or  varnished  by  workmen  in 


144 


ARISTOPIA. 


Europe.  The  abundance  of  good  cabinet 
woods  in  America  made  this  traffic  large  and 
profitable.  And  not  only  did  the  mills  of 
Mortonia  work  wood,  but  iron  also,  by  means 
of  lathes,  great  hammers,  and  ponderous  steel 
rollers  for  rolling  iron  into  bars  and  sheets,  all 
driven  by  water-power.  All  such  work  was  then 
done  in  Europe  by  unaided  human  muscle. 


ARISTOPTA. 


145 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Governor  Morton  was  especially  desirous 
of  procuring  immigrants  from  Switzerland — a 
hardy,  industrious,  intelligent,  and  moral  race. 
As  the  poor  resources  of  the  country  could  not 
support  her  increasing  swarms,  many  of  the 
people  were  desirous  of  emigrating.  Many  of 
her  young  men  were  sent  as  mercenaries  in 
foreign  wars,  and,  as  a  consequence,  there  was 
a  superabundance  of  women  in  Switzerland, 
while  in  Aristopia  there  was  a  deficiency  ;  so 
particular  effort  was  made  to  induce  unmarried 
Swiss  women  to  come  to  Aristopia.  The  fare 
of  all  these  emigrants  was  paid  down  the 
Rhine  to  points  accessible  to  Governor  Mor¬ 
ton’s  vessels,  in  which  they  were  given  free 
transportation  to  America,  as,  indeed,  were  all 
other  emigrants  to  Aristopia. 

In  some  of  the  cities  of  northern  Italy,  as 

Genoa,  Milan,  and  Venice,  were  some  of  the 

most  skilful  workmen  in  the  world,  and  many 

of  the  people  of  that  region,  particularly  of 
10 


146 


ARISTOPIA. 


Savoy,  were  Protestants,  severely  oppressed 
by  their  rulers  and  desirous  of  emigrating. 
Governor  Morton  had  two  of  his  ships  ply 
regularly  between  Genoa  and  Mortonia,  bring¬ 
ing  emigrants  from  Genoa. 

In  1618,  the  Thirty  Years’  Warm  Germany 
broke  out.  It  was  the  custom  of  that  age  to 
hold  prisoners  of  war  for  ransom,  in  default  of 
which  they  were  sold  into  servitude  differing 
from  slavery  principally  in  being  for  a  term 
instead  of  for  life.  Governor  Morton’s  agents 
purchased  thousands  of  these  prisoners,  who, 
on  taking  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  govern¬ 
ment  of  Aristopia,  were  shipped  thither  to  'be¬ 
come  citizens  in  due  time.  The  families  of 
such  of  them  as  had  families  whose  where¬ 
abouts  could  be  discovered  were  brought  over 
to  America.  During  this  war  the  theater  of 
military  operations  was  horribly  devastated, 
the  war  being  one  of  peculiar  bitterness. 
Myriads  of  women  and  children,  their  houses 
burned,  their  property  destroyed  or  carried  off, 
and  their  male  relatives  killed,  were  driven 
into  the  fields  and  woods  to  perish  with  hunger 
and  exposure  or  subsist  miserably  on  roots  and 
herbs*  Thousands  of  these  unfortunates  were 
picked  up  by  Governor  Morton’s  agents  and 


ARISTOPIA. 


147 


shipped  to  Aristopia,  where  they  found  comfort¬ 
able  homes,  and  the  women  were  soon  married. 

Governor  Morton  also,  at  his  own  expense, 
founded  and  sustained  orphan  asylums  at  Mor- 
tonia  and  Morgania,  in  which  thousands  of 
orphans  brought  from  European  cities  were 
*  reared  and  educated,  both  intellectually  and 
industrially,  into  good,  capable,  and  industri¬ 
ous  citizens  of  Aristopia.  They  acquired  the 
Aristopian  spirit  more  readily  than  the  adult 
immigrants,  as  they  had  not  so  many  European 
prejudices  to  overcome. 

That  the  heterogeneous  materials,  gathered 
in  so  many  countries,  of  different  sects,  nation¬ 
alities,  and  languages,  did  not  assimilate  with¬ 
out  some  effervescence  may  easily  be  imagined. 
There  were  many  broils,  especially  on  religious 
matters,  which  gave  Governor  Morton  much 
uneasiness ;  but  they  passed  over  without  seri¬ 
ous  consequences.  Religious  bigotry  in  Aris¬ 
topia  was  to  that  in  Europe  as  vaccinosis  is  to 
small-pox.  In  Aristopia  was  seen  what  Camp¬ 
bell  sings  of  Wyoming: 

“  For  here  the  exiles  met  from  every  clime, 

And  spoke  in  friendship  every  distant  tongue ; 
Men  from  the  blood  of  warring  Europe  sprung, 
Were  but  divided  by  the  running  brook.” 


148 


ARISTOPIA. 


The  children  of  all  these  differing  peoples 
grew  up  Aristopians  all,  differing  in  creed,  it  is 
true,  but  never  dreaming  of  attempting  to  sup¬ 
press  the  creed  of  others  or  force  their  own 
views  upon  others.  They  were  all  educated 
from  the  same  books  in  the  public  schools, 
where  no  sectarian  doctrines  were  allowed  to 
be  taught. 

That  the  ideas  of  the  age  demanded  something 
in  the  nature  of  religion  in  schools  Governor 
Morton  could  not  deny  ;  but  he  persuaded  the 
people  to  be  contented  with  the  reading  in  the 
schools  of  a  volume  composed  of  the  four  gos¬ 
pels  with  simple  historical  comments,  to  enable 
the  children  to  understand  the  literal  meaning1 
of  the  words ;  but  all  attempts  at  doctrinal 
comment  or  explanation  were  excluded.  The 
version  used  was  the  King  James’,  but  in  the 
reformed  spelling,  as  were  all  the  school-books 
of  Aristopia. 

Governor  Morton  had  established  a  large 
printing-office, which  every  year  turned  out  many 
thousand  volumes  of  works  of  useful  knowledge. 
He  employed  persons  in  England  not  only  to 
make  translations  of  works  in  Latin,  French, 
Italian,  and  Spanish,  but  to  rewrite,  in  a  concise 
and  popular  style,  works  written  in  a  prolix  and 


ABISTOPIA. 


149 


antiquated  style  of  English.  These  works  were 
published  in  Aristopia,  of  course  in  the  re¬ 
formed  spelling  and  grammar,  and  a  copy  of 
each  was  given  to  every  school  library.  Learn¬ 
ing  this  language  in  their  school-books,  the 
children  adopted  it  as  their  own,  and  there  grad¬ 
ually  grew  up  an  Aristopian  language  which 
may  he  described  as  a  perfected  English. 

While  the  colony  of  Aristopia  was  thus  ad¬ 
vancing  with  giant  strides  (but  so  quietly  as  to 
attract  little  public  attention  in  England),  the 
colony  of  Virginia  still  crawled  feebly  along 
with  its  “  strange  miracles  of  misery.”  There 
was  not  a  single  village  or  hamlet  in  the  colony 
except  Jamestown,  and  that  was  smaller  after 
twenty  years  than  it  was  two  years  after  it  was 
founded.  Each  family  lived  isolated,  every 
planter  a  petty  lordling  with  his  black  slaves 
(for  negro  slavery  had  been  introduced)  and 
white  indentured  servants,  the  latter  hardly  less 
slaves  than  the  former.  Indeed,  the  laws  of 
both  Virginia  and  Maryland  made  it  punish¬ 
able  with  death  for  one  of  these  white  servants 
to  run  away,  a  crime  described  with  grim 
quaintness  as  a  “  theft  of  himself.”  Many 
friendless  persons,  especially  orphan  boys  old 
enough  to  do  considerable  work,  were  kid- 


150 


APIS  TOPI  A. 


napped  in  England  and  Scotland,  and  sold  into 
servitude  in  Virginia.  Many  of  these  inden¬ 
tured  servants  escaped  into  Aristopia.  The 
government  would  not  shelter  these  persons  offi¬ 
cially  nor  prevent  their  masters  from  retaking 
them,  not  wishing  to  embroil  itself  with  the 
neighboring*  colonies;  but  there  were  not  lacking 
persons  in  Aristopia  to  assist  the  fugitives  to 
pass  swiftly  and  secretly  over  the  mountains 
to  the  remote  western  settlements,  so  that  one 
could  hardly  ever  be  retaken  by  his  master. 

As  to  negro  slavery,  as  soon  as  Governor 
Morton’s  attention  was  called  to  it  he  foresaw 
the  evils  it  would  bring,  as  well  as  its  inherent 
wrong,  and  he  hastened  to  urge  and  soon  pro¬ 
cured  a  constitutional  amendment  declaring  that 
slavery  or  involuntary  servitude,  except  for 
crime,  should  never  exist  in  Aristopia.  Con¬ 
sidering  the  depraved  public  sentiment  respect¬ 
ing  slavery  then  existing  in  England,  and  still 
more  in  other  parts  of  Europe,  this  provision 
was  a  very  advanced  one. 

In  its  relations  with  England,  no  other  law 
of  Aristopia  was  so  hard  to  be  enforced  against 
the  will  of  the  mother  country  as  this  law 
against  slavery;  for,  after  the  abdication  of 
James  II.,  when  Parliament  had  set  up  Dutch 


ARISTOPIA. 


151 


William  as  the  King  of  England,  the  kingdom 
was  ruled  by  Parliament,  which  was  itself  ruled 
by  the  trading  and  manufacturing  classes. 
These  classes  did  their  utmost  to  force  negro 
slavery  upon  the  colonies.  Each  class  had  its 
own  reason  for  this.  The  manufacturers 
wanted  the  colonies  to  produce  only  raw  ma¬ 
terials,  which  alone  could  be  produced  by  slave 
labor.  The  traders  wanted  the  same  thing,  as 
it  would  increase  their  trade  with  the  colonies  ; 
and  they  wanted  also  the  profit  of  the  slave 
trade. 

In  1622  the  Indians  made  a  wholesale  mas¬ 
sacre  of  the  scattered  colonists  of  Virginia. 
The  outbreak  did  not  extend  to  the  settlements 
of  Aristopia,  but  it  was  a  startling  warning  to 
them.  In  1627  it  was  estimated  that  there 
were  less  than  two  thousand  white  persons  liv¬ 
ing  in  Virginia,  out  of  the  seven  thousand  sent 
there  and  their  progeny. 

In  1620  a  settlement  of  the  Puritans  was 
made  in  what  afterward  became  the  colony  of 
Massachusetts.  Arriving  in  the  early  part  of 
a  terrible  winter,  nearly  destitute  on  account  of 
the  hard  terms  the  Dutch  and  London  mer¬ 
chants  made  with  them  in  furnishing  them 
passage,  there  was  a  great  deal  of  suffering  and 


152 


ARISTOPIA. 


death,  much  of  it  caused  by  what  Captain 
Smith  called  “  the  humorous  ignorances  of  your 
Brownists.”  But  the  Puritans,  while  profess¬ 
ing  to  esteem  worldly  things  very  lightly,  were 
too  practical  and  shrewd  long  to  retain  any 
u  humorous  ignorances  ”  of  their  surroundings, 
and  the  colony  was  soon  very  successful,  con¬ 
sidering  the  severity  of  the  climate  and  the 
sterility  of  the  soil. 

In  1632  Cecil  Calvert  established  a  colony 
whose  first  settlement  was  a  near  neighbor  of 
Mortonia,  being  near  the  mouth  of  the  Potomac. 
Calvert  obtained  a  charter  almost  exactly  like 
that  of  Morton.  His  grant  included,  roughly 
speaking,  the  territory  bounded  on  the  east  by 
the  Atlantic,  on  the  north  by  the  fortieth  par¬ 
allel,  and  on  the  south  and  east  by  the  Potomac 
and  a  line  drawn  across  the  eastern  peninsula 
on  about  the  thirty-eighth  parallel.  His  colo¬ 
nists  immediately  had  to  fight  for  their  grant 
with  a  Virginia  adventurer  named  Clayborne  ; 
and  many  years  afterward  Calvert’s  successor 
was  beaten  out  of  a  large  part  of  his  grant  by 
that  shrewd  Quaker,  William  Penn.  Calvert 
was  a  Catholic,  and  for  a  long  time  the  majority 
of  the  settlers  of  his  colony,  called  Maryland, 
were  Catholics.  The  colony  was  fairly  success- 


ARTS  TO  PI  A. 


153 


ful  from  the  start.  They  found  the  Indians  of 
the  western  shore  friendly,  and  never  had  any 
trouble  with  them;  but  some  of  the  tribes  of 
the  eastern  shore  were  vicious  and  hostile. 

Tobacco  soon  became  and  remained  almost 
the  only  product  of  Virginia  and  Maryland. 
It  was,  in  fact,  their  currency  and  legal  tender. 
While  tobacco  was  largly  cultivated  in  Aris- 
topia,  and  could  be  cultivated  better  than  corn 
on  steep  hillsides,  it  never  became  the  principal 
product  of  the  colony,  although  people  of  Aris- 
topia  had  a  great  advantage  over  those  of  Vir¬ 
ginia  in  selling  their  tobacco.  Almost  every 
plantation  in  Virginia  fronted  on  one  of  the 
several  navigable  rivers.  Ships  from  England 
and  Holland  anchored  in  front  of  the  plantation, 
took  on  the  planter’s  tobacco,  and  unloaded  the 
goods  in  which  it  was  paid  for.  Each  planter 
acted  for  himself.  He  consigned  his  tobacco 
to  some  English  or  Dutch  merchant,  who 
allowed  him  what  he  pleased  for  the  tobacco 
in  goods  the  price  of  which  was  fixed  by  the 
merchant.  The  helpless  planter  was  allowed 
just  enough  to  keep  him  from  utter  despair  and 
from  refusing  to  raise  and  ship  any  more 
tobacco.  All  the  tobacco  exported  from  Aris- 
topia  was  sent  by  the  commonwealth  to  one  of 


154 


APIS  TOP  I  A. 


the  governor’s  agents  in  England,  and  a  fair 
price  insured.  A  small  profit  went  to  the  com¬ 
monwealth,  serving,  instead  of  a  tax,  to  pay 
public  expenses. 

Governor  Morton  early  saw  that  the  vast  new 
continent  presented  for  subjection  to  human 
control  a  vaster  field  than  could  he  conquered 
by  unaided  human  muscle  in  centuries,  what¬ 
ever  myriads  of  the  surplus  population  of  Europe 
his  gold  would  enable  him  to  ship  over.  He 
saw  that  the  wilderness  must  be  conquered  by 
machinery,  and  that  the  wants  of  the  people 
engaged  in  the  conquest  must  be  ministered 
to  by  machinery,  driven  by  water-power  to  do 
whatever  work  could  be  done  by  stationary 
machines,  and  propelled  by  horse-power  where 
locomotive  machines  must  be  employed. 

Agricultural  implements  and  the  methods  of 
using  them  were  among  the  first  improvements 
made.  Plows  were  greatly  improved,  and  it 
was  found  that  Indian  corn  could,  after  the 
land  was  freed  from  roots  and  numerous  stumps, 
be  cultivated  with  small,  light  plows  much 
more  easily  than  with  hoes  by  hand,  as  the 
Indian  squaws  had  done  the  work.  The  gov¬ 
ernor  himself,  having  great  inventive  faculties, 
invented  the  grain  cradle  to  take  the  place  of 


AUISTOPIA. 


155 


the  ancient  sickle,  and  a  brush  scythe,  with  a 
short,  thick  blade,  heavily  braced,  for  cutting 
bushes  and  brambles,  in  place  of  the  English 
bill-hook. 

Governor  Morton  saw,  too,  that  his  trans- 
montane  colony,  not  able  to  export  much  of 
its  crude  products  to  Europe,  as  the  three 
hundred  miles  or  more  of  land  carriage  would 
be  too  expensive,  must  manufacture  for  itself, 
especially  heavy  and  bulky  articles ;  and  to  do 
this  profitably,  with  so  many  hands  needed  so 
much  in  subduing  savage  nature,  would  re¬ 
quire  better  machinery  than  the  world  had  yet 
seen.  Many  skillful  mechanics,  from  Holland, 
Flanders,  Genoa,  Venice,  and  the  Free  Cities 
of  Germany,  had  come  to  Aristopia.  These 
were  stimulated  by  hope  of  reward,  both  of 
money  and  honor,  to  invent  new  machines  and 
improve  old  ones.  Laws  were  passed  either 
allowing  the  inventor  of  a  mechanical  device 
the  sole  right  of  making  and  selling  it  for  a 
term  of  years,  or,  if  the  commonwealth  saw  fit 
to  manufacture  the  device,  obliging  it  to  pay 
the  inventor  a  premium  (better  understood 
as  a  “ royalty”)  on  each  article;  but  these 
premiums  should  not  aggregate  more  than  ten 
thousand  dollars,  for  it  was  not  thought  meet 


156 


AEISTOPIA. 


that  the  commonwealth  should  enrich  any  of 
its  citizens  to  such  an  extent  as  to  enable  them, 
if  so  disposed  (and  most  rich  men  are  so  dis¬ 
posed),  to  oppress  or  corrupt  their  fellow- 
citizens. 

But  there  was  a  reward  to  be  coveted  by 
inventors  which  could  hardly  become  danger¬ 
ous  to  the  commonwealth — honor.  Men  in  all 
ages  and  under  all  forms  of  government  have 
coveted  titles.  Civilized  or  barbarous,  royalist 
or  republican,  all  are  ready  to  risk  life,  endure 
suffering,  and  even  give  up  wealth  for  titles, 
or,  in  other  words,  honor.  When  titles  are 
bestowed  on  the  worthy  and  do  not  carry  with 
them  undue  power  or  a  revenue  wrung  by 
privilege  and  monopoly  from  the  people,  and 
are  not  hereditary,  giving  to  a  person,  however 
unworthy,  power  and  honor  merely  on  account 
of  what  his  father  did  or  was,  they  are  some¬ 
thing  not  to  be  rejected  and  despised  by  a 
wise  social  economy.  So  it  was  enacted  that 
the  Governor  of  Aristopia  should  bestow  titles 
of  honor  on  persons  of  conspicuous  merit  or 
who  had  rendered  signal  service  to  the  com- 
monwealth.  Prominent  among  those  to  be  so 
rewarded  were  inventors.  These  titles  were 
not  to  be  hereditary  nor  carry  with  them  any 


ARISTOPIA. 


157 


pecuniary  reward  or  revenue — nothing  but  a 
gold  medal  or  badge  and  a  ribbon. 

Among  the  great  needs  of  the  common¬ 
wealth  was  a  machine  for  the  rapid  and  cheap 
manufacture  of  nails.  The  great  increase  in 
the  production  of  lumber  by  the  invention  of 
saw-mills  made  it  possible  to  build  a  board 
bouse  much  more  quickly  than  a  log  one,  and 
when  built  it  was  more  cleanly  and  sightly. 
But  the  cost  of  band-made  nails,  many  of 
which  were  needed  in  a  frame  bouse,  was  a 
great  drawback.  Stimulated  by  promised  re¬ 
wards,  and  encouraged  by  the  governor’s  bear¬ 
ing  the  expense  of  their  experiments,  some 
mechanics  soon  produced  a  practicable  nail- 
machine,  which,  with  a  single  attendant,  could 
cut  from  a  thin  strip  of  iron  as  many  nails  in 
a  day  as  a  hundred  men  could  make  by  hand 
in  the  same  time.  Building  was  thus  cheap¬ 
ened  in  Aristopia,  and  nails  were  made  for 
export.  The  machine  was  kept  a  secret,  al¬ 
though  it  would  hardly  have  been  adopted 
in  Europe  if  known,  such  was  the  prejudice 
against  machinery  in  the  old  world.  When 
some  progressive  person  ventured  to  introduce 
a  new  machine  in  Europe,  mobs  of  workmen 
destroyed  it  lest  it  should  displace  them,  and 


158 


ARISTOPIA. 


cut  off  even  the  poor  wages  they  received. 
But  in  Aristopia  the  poorest  workmen  had  no 
fear  of  machinery.  None  was  so  dull  as  not 
to  see  that  the  vast  continent  offered  work 
which  every  available  hand,  aided  by  every 
possible  machine,  could  not  do  in  generations. 
Governor  Morton,  foreseeing  the  danger  that 
individuals,  through  wealth  obtained  by  what¬ 
ever  means,  might  own  and  control  machinery 
to  such  an  extent  as  to  oppress  laborers,  used 
every  device  of  statecraft,  first,  to  prevent 
any  dangerous  accumulation  of  wealth  in  the 
hands  of  individuals,  and  next,  to  accustom  the 
people  to  the  public  control  of  great  aggrega¬ 
tions  of  manufacturing  machinery. 

A  thing  which  Governor  Morton  very  much 
desired,  but  which  he  did  not  see  until  he  was 
very  old,  was  machinery  for  spinning  and 
weaving,  driven  by  water-power,  replacing  the 
spinning-wheel  and  hand-loom  by  which  cloth 
was  then  produced,  a  work  which  fell  with 
great  weight  on  the  patient,  drudging  house¬ 
wife. 


ARISTOPIA. 


159 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

One  of  the  most  destructive  scourges  of 
mankind  in  the  days  of  which  we  write,  and 
of  uncounted  centuries  before,  was  smallpox. 
Other  plagues  were  more  destructive  for  a  time, 
but  their  duration  was  short,  and  the  intervals 
between  their  appearances  were  long.  Small¬ 
pox,  however,  was  always  lurking  in  some  cor¬ 
ner  of  every  country,  ready  to  take  advantage 
of  circumstances  favorable  for  an  epidemic. 
It  has  been  estimated  that  half  a  million  peo¬ 
ple  perished  annually  of  smallpox  in  Europe. 
The  Spaniards  carried  it  to  Mexico  and  South 
America,  where  it  committed  the  most  fright¬ 
ful  ravages  among  the  Indians  and  the  negro 
slaves.  The  English  and  French  carried  it  to 
North  America,  where  it  exterminated  whole 
tribes  of  Indians.  It  has  ever  been  noticed 
that  the  disease  is  much  more  virulent  and 
fatal  among  the  dark  races  than  among  the 
light  ones.  America  was  only  thinly  populated 


160 


ARISTOPIA. 


with  Indians  when  the  European  settlements 
were  first  planted.  Of  this  thin  population  it 
is  estimated  that  six  millions  perished  of  small¬ 
pox  in  a  century. 

One  of  the  first  cares  of  Ralph  Morton  was 
to  exclude  the  scourge  from  his  colony.  His 
agents  were  continually  warned  against  ship¬ 
ping  persons  suffering  from,  or  suspected  of 
being  infected  with,  smallpox.  When  the 
disease  became  epidemic  in  any  port  of 
Europe  Morton’s  vessels  ceased  to  visit  that 
port  until  the  epidemic  subsided.  V essels 
arriving  at  Mortonia  with  the  pest  on  board 
were  rigidly  quarantined  and  all  infected 
articles  destroyed.  The  cleaner  and  more 
comfortable  mode  of  living  in  Aristopia  than 
that  of  the  common  people  in  Europe,  where 
poverty  among  the  masses  was  the  mother  of 
filth  and  squalor,  was  favorable  to  exemption 
from  the  scourge. 

But  still,  smallpox  was  the  terror  of  the 
world,  and  no  hope  of  exemption  appeared. 

The  second  wife  of  Ralph  Morton  was  the 
daughter  of  a  Gloucestershire  farmer  and  dairy¬ 
man.  From  the  time  of  her  marriage  she  had 
observed  her  husband’s  anxiety  about  the  small¬ 
pox  and  his  unceasing  efforts  to  exclude  the 


ARISTOPIA. 


161 


scourge  from  the  colony  and  mitigate  its  rav¬ 
ages  when  it  gained  an  entrance.  But  it  was 
many  years  before  it  occurred  to  her  to  tell 
her  husband  something  of  which  she  made 
little  account,  but  which  seemed  to  him  of  im¬ 
mense  importance.  She  said  it  had  long  been 
known  that  the  cows  of  Gloucestershire  were 
subject  to  a  pustular  disease  which  could  be, 
and  sometimes  was,  communicated  to  the 
milkers  who  had  chaps  or  abrasions  of  the 
skin  upon  their  hands.  It  was  believed  by 
some  that  those  persons  who  had  suffered  from 
the  cowpox  would  not  have  the  smallpox,  or, 
if  they  did,  that  it  would  be  in  a  very  mild 
form.  She  told  of  a  school-teacher  who  had 
inoculated  several  children  with  the  cowpox ; 
these  children  had  escaped  the  smallpox,  even 
when  it  attacked  their  families. 

Ralph  Morton  had  one  of  those  fertile  minds 
in  which  suggestions,  falling  sterile  on  other 
minds,  like  seeds  sown  upon  the  stones  of  the 
highway  or  among  the  bushes  and  brambles  of 
the  roadside,  sprang  up  in  a  fruitful  growth. 
He  wondered  much  that  if  one  person  had  ob¬ 
served  that  cowpox  gave  immunity  from  small¬ 
pox,  all  the  world  had  not  soon  known  and 
availed  itself  of  the  immunity.  He  did  not 


162 


ARISTOPIA. 


make  sufficient  allowance  for  human  dullness 
and  prejudice. 

He  pondered  the  matter  some  time  and  then 
sent  an  agent  to  Gloucestershire  to  investigate. 
The  agent  reported  that  in  fact  he  had  found 
cows  with  the  pustular  disease,  and  by  diligent 
inquiry  learned  of  the  existence  of  a  tradition 
that  the  disease  communicated  to  mankind 
gave  immunity  from  smallpox. 

Morton  then  ordered  twenty  young  heifers 
to  be  shipped  from  Gloucestershire  to  Mortonia ; 
two  of  them  on  leaving  England  were  to  be 
inoculated  with  the  cowpox,  and  during  the 
voyage  two  other  heifers  should  be  inoculated 
every  ten  days,  so  that  the  virus  should  be 
kept  fresh.  At  Mortonia  other  heifers  were  to 
be  inoculated,  and  thus  a  sufficient  supply  of 
virus  would  be  provided. 

Meanwhile  the  governor  had  published  the 
matter  and  called  for  volunteers  to  be  vacci- 
natedv  Several  physicians  and  many  other 
young  men  responded,  having  great  confidence 
in  the  governor’s  wisdom  and  knowledge.  The 
governor  promised  to  confer  a  title  of  honor 
upon  any  vaccinated  physician  who  would  go 
into  a  smallpox  hospital  as  doctor  or  nurse, 
and  to  give  a  pension  of  five  hundred  dollars  a 


ARISTOPIA. 


163 


year  to  the  family  of  any  person  who  should, 
while  so  acting  as  nurse  or  physician,  contract 
the  smallpox  and  die  of  it. 

There  never  have  been  lacking,  in  any  civilized 
community,  a  few  devoted  persons  willing  to 
expose  themselves  to  the  dangers  of  plague  in 
ministering  to  the  sufferings  of  their  fellow- 
beings,  and  that  without  hope  of  extraordinary 
reward.  Still  more  were  thus  willing  when 
special  honors  were  to  be  reaped  and  provision 
was  to  he  made  for  the  future  of  their  families. 
The  smallpox  was  not  just  then  in  existence  in 
Aristopia,  hut  in  some  of  the  other  colonies 
there  were  local  epidemics,  and  thither  went 
Aristopians,  to  try  the  efficacy  of  vaccina¬ 
tion. 

Every  one  of  these  persons  became  firmly 
convinced  that  vaccination  furnished  either  en¬ 
tire  immunity,  or  immunity  from  all  except  a  very 
mild  form  of  smallpox.  Their  testimony  was 
published  in  newspapers,  pamphlets,  lectures, 
and  by  the  teachers  of  public  schools  all  over 
Aristopia.  Many  persons,  including  physi¬ 
cians,  lent  the  governor  their  aid  in  urging 
general  vaccination.  When  a  smallpox  epi¬ 
demic  at  last  broke  out  in  Aristopia  the  efficacy 
of  vaccination  was  so  fully  demonstrated  that 


164 


ARISTOPIA. 


none  but  strongly  prejudiced  persons  longer 
disbelieved. 

The  good  news  that  here  at  last  was  protec¬ 
tion  from  the  world’s  terror,  was  published  far 
and  near.  It  might  be  supposed  that  all  would 
gladly  hail  and  quickly  avail  themselves  of  the 
protection.  Not  so.  Mighty  indeed  is  human 
prejudice,  invincible  when  fortified  with  re¬ 
ligious  superstition.  Nowhere  in  the  civilized 
world  outside  of  Aristopia  was  there  sufficient 
freedom  from  bigotry  to  allow  vaccination  to 
be  adopted,  for  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth 
centuries  were  the  acme  of  religious  fanaticism 
in  the  world’s  history.  The  pulpit  everywhere 
thundered  against  the  impiety  of  vaccination. 
Smallpox  was  a  wise  dispensation  of  Providence 
to  rid  the  poor  man  of  the  burden  of  his 
numerous  family  ;  it  was  a  fitting  punishment 
for  the  sins  of  the  proud  and  impious  ;  to  at¬ 
tempt  to  escape  from  or  abolish  it  was  sac¬ 
rilege.  Passages  of  Scripture  were  searched 
out  and  pieced  together  to  prove  that  vaccina¬ 
tion  was  even  anti-Christ.  The  miracle-mongers 
of  the  Church  did  not  fail  to  find  warning 
portents.  Ox-faced  boys  and  cow-faced  girls 
were  known  (it  was  said)  to  be  born  of  mothers 
who  had  been  vaccinated.  God’s  wrath  was 


AEISTOPIA. 


165 


called  down  upon  the  impious  who  attempted 
thus  to  escape  his  scourge,  a  scourge  intended 
in  mercy,  as  they  were  too  blind  to  see. 

Thus,  for  a  century  after  Aristopia  enjoyed 
practical  exemption  from  the  scourge,  Europe 
suffered  on,  until  at  last  the  fierce  fever  of 
bigotry  so  far  subsided  as  to  leave  fair  room 
for  reason,  when  the  whole  civilized  world 
(except  a  small  prejudiced  minority)  availed 
itself  of  the  boon,  first  made  public  by  Ralph 
Morton. 


166 


ARISTOPIA. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

The  terrible  storm  of  civil  war  in  England 
between  the  partisans  of  the  King  and  those 
of  the  Parliament  was  almost  unfelt  in  the 
American  colonies,  and  especially  in  Aristopia. 
Its  principal  effect  was  to  send  many  royalist 
refugees  to  Virginia,  when  the  King’s  cause 
met  with  final  disaster,  and  many  to  Aristopia 
of  those  who  abhorred  the  excesses  of  both  sides. 
Though  Governor  Morton  had  little  cause  to 
complain  of  Charles  I,  he  naturally  hoped  the 
struggle  might  pave  the  way  for  a  republic  in 
England.  Seeing  in  Cromwell,  after  the  exe¬ 
cution  of  Charles,  the  man  in  whom  he  thought 
lay  England’s  only  hope  of  extrication  from  the 
anarchy  into  which  the  factions  of  Parliament 
had  plunged  the  country,  he  sent  that  general 
ten  thousand  pounds  to  assist  him. 

In  1649  Governor  Morton  went  to  Holland, 
with  a  large  amount  of  gold,  to  arrange  some 
business  in  person,  being  also  desirous  of  see- 


ARISTOPIA. 


167 


ing  Europe  again.  At  this  time  Cromwell 
was  in  Ireland,  subduing  that  country,  which 
had  taken  up  arms  for  Charles  II.  The  Irish 
were  completely  defeated,  and  so  reduced  to 
despair  that  an  immense  body  of  them  de¬ 
termined  to  emigrate.  Word  came  to  Holland 
that  they  were  assembled  on  the  western  coast 
of  Ireland,  awaiting  vessels  to  take  them  away. 
Governor  Morton  promptly  resolved  to  take 
them  to  Aristopia.  He  quickly  sent  word  to 
the  captains  of  all  his  own  vessels  whom  he 
could  reach,  to  sail  immediately  to  the  coast  of 
Ireland,  and  take  as  many  Irish  as  possible  to 
Mortonia,  if  they  would  go.  He  also  employed 
a  large  number  of  Dutch  vessels  for  the  same 
purpose.  As  the  Irish  who  were  determined 
on  self -exile  had  no  particular  destination  in 
view,  Morton’s  agents  easily  induced  them  to 
go  to  Aristopia  on  promise  of  profitable  em¬ 
ployment  and  political  and  religious  liberty. 
More  than  forty  thousand  Irish,  mostly  men, 
thus  expatriated  themselves.  Cromwell,  de¬ 
sirous  of  ridding  the  island  of  these  intractable 
subjects  of  the  English  government,  gave  them 
ample  time  to  embark.  Of  the  forty  thousand 
more  than  twenty-five  thousand,  including 
nearly  all  of  the  small  proportion  of  women 


168 


ARISTOPIA. 


and  children  among  the  exiles,  went  to* 
Aristopia. 

It  is  certain  that  Governor  Morton  averted 
a  vast  amount  of  human  misery  by  his  action, 
for  terrible  indeed  would  have  been  the  suffer¬ 
ings  of  those  poverty-stricken  exiles,  inured 
although  they  were  to  hardships,  if  they  had 
been  thrown  in  great  masses,  ignorant  of  the 
language,  manners,  and  industries  of  the 
countries  to  which  they  might  have  gone,  into 
any  other  community  than  Aristopia,  with  its 
unique  governor. 

It  was  a  very  hazardous  experiment  to  throw 
a  mass  of  semi-barbarous  people  like  the  Irish 
of  that  age  into  a  new  colony,  and  the  colonists 
murmured  much  when  they  learned  of  it. 
The  Irish  were  accounted  by  the  English  as 
little  more  civilized  than  the  Indians,  and  quite 
as  hopeless  of  civilization.  But  Governor 
Morton  did  not  share  these  prejudices.  He 
knew  that  the  Irish  were  rude,  ignorant,  and 
half-savage  in  their  manners;  but  he  also 
knew  that  this  rudeness  was  not  inherent  in 
the  race,  as  in  the  Indians.  He  remembered 
that,  some  centuries  before,  Ireland  had  been 
the  seat  of  by  far  the  highest  civilization  of 
which  western  Europe  could  boast,  and  that 


ARTS  TOP  I  A. 


169 


their  present  degradation  was  the  result  of 
hideous  misgovernment.  Under  good  govern¬ 
ment  he  was  sure  the  Irish  would  rise  from 
their  degradation  and  recover  their  ancient 
civilization. 

He  wanted  only  industrious  citizens  in  Aris- 
topia  ;  the  English  of  that  time  and  for  cen¬ 
turies  afterward  were  never  tired  of  descanting 
on  Irish  sloth.  Says  Macaulay  :  “  The  Irish 
peasant  feared  not  danger  half  so  much  as 
work.”  But  Governor  Morton  had  read  his¬ 
tory  enough  to  know  that  no  misgoverned 
people  are  ever  industrious,  because  they  have 
no  incentive  to  produce  anything  of  which 
they  would  probably  he  robbed.  No  civilized 
race,  well  governed,  has  shown  a  lack  of  the 
industry  necessary  to  obtain  a  comfortable 

To  feed  this  army,  almost  as  great  as  was 
then  the  whole  population  of  Virginia  and 
Maryland  combined,  in  a  new  country,  until 
they  could  produce  something  from  the  soil, 
was  no  small  task.  The  governor  had  several 
shiploads  of  wheat  and  barley  shipped 
promptly  from  Holland,  then  a  mart  for  every 
commodity,  and  as  soon  as  possible  sent  word 
to  Aristopia  to  export  no  more  grain.  When 


170 


ARISTOPIA. 


the  fleet  bearing  this  army  of  immigrants 
arrived,  the  Potomac  was  whitened  with  sails 
like  the  Thames,  and  the  river  bank  from 
Mortonia  far  down  was  fringed  with  masts  like 
the  docks  of  London.  The  horse-boats  worked 
night  and  day,  with  relays  of  men  and  horses, 
towing  the  ships  up  the  river.  As  the  Irish 
were  known  to  be  turbulent,  a  considerable 
force  of  militia  was  kept  in  readiness  as  a 
police. 

About  five  thousand  of  the  Irish  were  put 
at  work  on  the  canal  along  the  upper  Potomac, 
and  the  rest  were  marched  over  the  mountains. 
Many  of  them  had  been  fishermen  in  Ireland. 
These  were  selected  and  set  to  fishing  on  the 
lower  Potomac  and  the  Chesapeake.  The  fish 
they  caught  were  salted  and  sent  to  feed  the 
Irish  immigrants.  Part  of  the  Irish  were  as- 
sisted  in  making  themselves  farmers,  some 
were  employed  by  private  individuals,  more  on 
public  works  by  the  commonwealth,  and  the 
rest  by  the  governor  at  his  private  expense. 

Though  wild  and  turbulent  at  first,  and  re¬ 
quiring  considerable  extra  police  force,  they 
gradually  improved.  Paid  fair  wages  and  en¬ 
couraged  by  every  possible  means  to  desire 
and  attain  a  higher  and  more  comfortable  con- 


ARISTOPIA. 


171 


dition  of  life  than  they  had  known  before, 
their  improvement  was  rapid.  In  a  few  years 
they  wrent  far  to  justify  Governor  Morton’s 
opinion  of  their  capacity  for  civilization,  and 
their  children  did  so  completely. 

As  soon  as  possible,  the  governor’s  agents 
sought  out  and  brought  over  the  families  of 
such  of  the  immigrants  as  had  left  families  in 
Ireland.  Some  of  the  most  intelligent  of  the 

<D 

immigrants  were  selected  and  sent  back  to 
Ireland  to  assist  in  inducing  enough  young 
Irish  women  to  come  over  to  mate  the  unmar¬ 
ried  men.  In  the  distracted  and  impoverished 
state  of  the  country,  with  myriads  of  their 
young  men  slain  in  their  struggle  with  the 
conquering  English,  and  thousands  exiled,  it 
was  not  difficult  to  find  shiploads  of  surplus 
women,  many  of  them  lone  and  homeless  and 
only  too  glad  to  accept  any  offered  refuge. 

The  victories  of  Cromwell  gave  another 
peculiar  accession  to  the  population  of  Aris- 
topia,  but  a  much  smaller  one  than  that  of 
the  Irish  exiles.  Nearly  two  hundred  of  the 
Scotch  captured  at  the  battle  of  Worcester  in 
1651  were  shipped  to  Virginia  to  be  sold 
into  servitude — something  which  sounds  very 
strange  in  this  age.  Governor  Morton  bought 


172 


ARISTOPIA. 


the  whole  lot  before  they  were  landed.  They 
were  then  informed  that  if  they  would  take 
the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  government  of 
Aristopia,  and  especially  an  oath  never  to 
molest  their  neighbors  by  word  or  deed  in  the 
free  exercise  of  their  religious  faith  (for  the 
Scotch  of  that  day  were  generally  furious 
zealots  in  religion),  they  would  be  allowed 
their  freedom  in  Aristopia,  where  in  due  time 
they  might  become  citizens  ;  otherwise  they 
would  be  resold  in  Virginia.  The  offer  wras 
unanimously  accepted,  although  it  was  a  bitter 
pill  to  most  of  these  Covenanters  to  swear  not 
to  do  their  utmost  against  u  popish  dogs  ”  and 
“  recusants,”  if  not  against  less  heinous  heretics 
and  “  antichrists.”  But  in  the  course  of  years 
the  savage  zeal  of  these  men  abated  so  much 
that  they  were  content  merely  to  think  evil  of 
their  neighbors  who  were  in  “  spiritual  dark¬ 
ness,”  without  saying  much  or  doing  anything 
violent  to  enlighten  them.  The  families  of 
such  of  them  as  had  families  in  Scotland  were 
brought  over  to  Aristopia. 

The  fleet  which  brought  these  Scotch  pris¬ 
oners  came  over  to  “  reduce  ”  Virginia,  which 
had  declared  for  the  King.  The  work  of 
reduction  was  very  speedily  performed.  The 


I 


ARISTOPIA.  173 

parliamentary  commissioners  made  very  favora¬ 
ble  terms  for  the  Virginians  ;  indeed,  they  left 
them  more  freedom  and  self-government  than 
the  King  had  given  them.  Maryland,  as  a 
Catholic  colonv,  was  “  reduced  ”  to  the  extent 
of  rendering  Catholics  incompetent  to  hold 
office  and  putting  the  local  government  into 
the  hands  of  the  few  Puritans  the  colony  con¬ 
tained.  Aristopia  had  not  rendered  itself 
obnoxious  to  the  parliamentary  party,  and  was 
not  molested. 

The  rule  of  the  66  Rump,”  and  the  protecto¬ 
rates  of  Oliver  and  Richard  Cromwell  passed 
away  without  any  event  of  importance  in  the 
relations  of  England  and  the  colonies.  The 
short  war  with  Holland  and  the  Navigation 
Act  of  Parliament  hardly  interrupted  the  trade 
of  the  colonies  with  the  Dutch. 

For  many  years  after  the  accession  of 
Charles  II.  the  King  and  Parliament  were  too 
intent  on  watching  each  other  to  pay  much 
attention  to  the  colonies.  At  last  Charles  had 
sufficient  leisure  to  inflict  two  of  his  favorites, 
Arlington  and  Culpeper,  on  Virginia,  which  was 
unfortunate  enough  to  be  the  favorite  of  the 
Stuarts.  Large  grants  of  land  were  given  to 
these  rapacious  parasites,  whom  the  Virginians 


174 


ARISTOPIA. 


finally  bought  off.  Another  such  favorite  was 
about  to  be  inflicted  on  Aristopia,  when  Gov¬ 
ernor  Morton’s  agents  succeeded,  by  the  pay¬ 
ment  of  twenty  thousand  pounds,  in  inducing 
the  King  to  renounce  his  intention  and  sign  a 
solemn  promise  that  the  charter  given  by  his 
grandfather  should  be  forever  respected  to  the 
letter. 

That  charter  had  given  Governor  Morton 
the  right  to  levy  customs,  and  had  exempted 
the  colony  from  the  levying  of  royal  customs 
within  its  borders.  But  the  terms  of  this 
exemption  were  vague,  and  Governor  Morton 
had  much  difficulty  in  keeping  his  colony  free 
from  royal  spies  in  the  form  of  customs  offi¬ 
cers;  he  wished  to  conceal  from  the  English 
government  the  proceedings  of  the  common¬ 
wealth  and  the  fact  that  Aristopia  was  export¬ 
ing  largely  of  its  manufactures — a  fact  which, 
if  fully  known,  would  have  aroused  the  jealousy 
of  the  English  government  and  provoked  re¬ 
strictive  legislation.  It  is  popularly  but  erro¬ 
neously  supposed  in  America  that  restrictive 
legislation  against  manufacturing  in  the  col¬ 
onies  began  with  the  colonization ;  but  in  fact 
it  was  more  than  a  century  after  the  founding 
of  Jamestown  before  the  English  manufactur- 


ARISTOPIA. 


175 


ers  awoke  to  the  fact  that  America  was  manu¬ 
facturing  for  herself  and  before  they  obtained 
power  enough  in  Parliament  to  procure  restrict¬ 
ive  legislation. 

Charles  II.  died,  and  James  II.  became  King 
of  England  in  1685.  His  arbitrary  and  tyran¬ 
nical  career  as  lord  proprietor  and  governor  of 

* 

the  colonies  of  New  York  and  New  Jersey, 
while  he  was  Duke  of  York,  prepared  him  for 
arbitrary  measures  with  the  colonies  when  he 
became  King  of  Great  Britain.  One  of  these 
measures  was  to  send  over  one  of  his  favor¬ 
ites,  George  Arundel,  as  governor  of  Aristo¬ 
pia,  in  the  place  of  the  venerable  Governor 
Morton,  then  nearly  one  hundred  years  old ; 
although  this  was  in  flagrant  violation  of  the 
charter. 

The  royalist  governor  came  to  Morgania, 
the  capital  of  Aristopia,  and  very  much  sur¬ 
prised  he  was  to  find  flourishing  and  highly 
civilized  communities  where  he  expected  to 
find  the  scattered  settlements  and  rude  huts 
of  a  few  thousand  semi-barbarous  colonists. 
Mortonia  was  a  city  of  several  thousand  in¬ 
habitants,  with  many  public  buildings,  all  of 
brick  or  stone,  with  slate  roofs.  The  dwelling- 
houses  were  mostly  of  wood,  neatly  painted, 


176 


ARISTOPIA. 


and  glass  windows  were  more  plentiful  than  in 
London.  All  the  land  from  the  Eastern  Branch 
to  Rock  Creek,  and  much  above  the  creek, 
was  a  close  succession  of  well-cultivated  farms, 
orchards,  vineyards,  and  gardens.  The  land 
along*  the  river  too  moist  for  cultivation  was 
an  expanse  of  green  meadows.  Morgania  was 
considerably  larger  and  more  flourishing  than 
Mortonia.  The  new  governor  never  went 
beyond  Morgania,  and  never  learned  the 
greatness  of  the  civilized  communities  which 
stretched  far  down  the  Ohio. 

The  system  of  government  of  Aristopia  re¬ 
quired  of  its  chief  executive  little  action  in  the 
way  of  ruling.  He  was  rather  the  chief  clerk 
of  a  business  bureau  than  a  ruler.  Thus,  while 
the  royalist  governor  imagined  he  was  governing 
the  colony,  the  work  of  this  bureau  w'ent  on 
without  any  reference  to  him.  At  last,  finding 
that  no  attention  was  paid  to  his  edicts,  he 
began  to  bluster  and  threaten.  Then  the  real 
head  of  the  commonwealth,  the  venerable 
Governor  Morton,  ordered  several  thousand  of 
the  well-drilled  militia  of  Aristopia  to  Morgania 
and  displayed  them  before  the  nominal  ruler. 
It  was  then  suggested  to  Arundel  that  he  could 
probably  rule  Aristopia  much  better  through 


A  RISTOPIA. 


177 


a  lieutenant-governor  while  residing  in  Lon¬ 
don  than  by  remaining  in  Morgania.  Gover¬ 
nor  Morton  promised  to  pay  him  an  annual 
pension  of  double  the  salary  he  was  receiving. 

Arundel  was  not  a  very,  wise  man,  but  he 
was  no  fool.  He  saw  that  governing  Aristopia 
in  reality  would  be  for  him  a  very  trouble¬ 
some  work.  Then,  too,  he  was  an  aristocrat, 
and  the  democratic  civilization  of  Aristopia,  so 
different  from  that  of  England,  however  well  it 
might  suit  Aristopians,  was  distasteful  to  him. 
He  much  preferred  life  in  London,  especially 
with  a  double  salary.  So  one  fine  day  he 
climbed  into  a  six-horse  coach,  and  with  his 
retinue  of  servants  at  his  back,  turned  his  face 
toward  the  Atlantic  and  left  Morgania,  amid 
the  blare  of  much  martial  music,  the  waving 
of  many  red-cross  flags,  and  the  booming  of 
cannons.  All  this  was  ostensibly  in  loyal 
honor  of  their  departing  guest  and  ruler ;  but 
it  might  have  occurred  even  to  Arundel  that 
the  demonstrations  were  rather  an  ironical 
honor. 

Arundel  left  as  his  lieutenant  Henry  Mor¬ 
gan,  a  brother-in-law  of  Governor  Morton’s 
son.  The  nominal  lieutenant-governor  never 

had  the  slightest  idea  of  exercising  any  of  the 
12 


178 


ARISTOPIA. 


functions  of  governor,  and  after  the  departure 
of  Arundel  the  government  of  Aristopia  moved 
on  exactly  as  before  his  coming.  The  cautious 
old  governor  would  rather  pay  out  a  few 
thousand  pounds  than  to  plunge  the  common¬ 
wealth  into  a  struggle  with  the  King  or  let  the 
royalist  tool  remain  to  meddle  with  the  affairs 
of  the  commonwealth. 

But  Arundel’s  pension  was  of  short  duration. 
The  reckless  and  stubborn  James  so  aroused 
England  against  himself  that  he  was  forced  to 
abdicate  in  1688,  and  Dutch  William  ascended 
the  English  throne.  The  pension  to  the  nom¬ 
inal  governor  of  Aristopia  was  immediately 
stopped,  and  the  tool  of  the*  exiled  king  saw 
the  hopelessness  of  any  attempt  to  enforce  the 
payment. 

In  the  first  year  of  the  reign  of  James  II. 
the  Duke  of  Monmouth,  an  illegitimate  son  of 
Charles  II.,  raised  an  insurrection,  which  was 
speedily  suppressed.  A  thousand  of  his  fol¬ 
lowers  were  sold  into  servitude.  Governor  Mor¬ 
ton’s  agents  bought  and  shipped  nearly  all  of 
them  to  Aristopia.  Their  joy  may  be  imagined 
when  they  found  themselves  freemen  in  the  new 
world,  with  brighter  prospects  than  they  had 
ever  hoped  for  in  their  most  prosperous  days. 


ARISTOPIA. 


179 


They  were  mostly  agricultural  peasants,  mate¬ 
rial  from  which  useful  citizens  might  be  made. 
The  families  of  such  of  them  as  had  families 
were  brought  to  them. 

Toward  the  end  of  this  same  year  1685,  be¬ 
gan  the  greatest  immigration  into  Aristopia 
which  ever  occurred  in  so  short  a  time.  The 
arrogant  and  despotic  King  of  France  revoked 
the  edict  of  Nantes  by  which  the  Protestants 
of  France  had  for  many  years  enjoyed  a  small 
degree  of  religious  liberty.  The  high-spirited 
Huguenots  resolved  not  to  remain  and  endure 

O 

the  terrible  persecutions  which  quickly  fol¬ 
lowed  the  revocation,  and  they  soon  began  a 
wholesale  emigration.  Many  of  the  French 
Huguenots  had  already  come  to  Aristopia. 
Some  of  these  were  immediately  sent  back  to 
France  to  co-operate  with  Governor  Morton’s 
agency  (which  was  well  organized  in  France) 
in  inducing  the  exiles  to  come  to  Aristopia. 
The  number  of  these  exiles  is  variously  esti¬ 
mated  at  from  three  to  five  hundred  thousand. 
So  well  directed  were  the  efforts  of  Morton’s 
agency,  supported  with  abundant  means,  and  so 
great  the  inducements  offered,  that  more  than 
one  hundred  thousand  of  these  Huguenots  came 
to  Aristopia  in  a  single  year.  They  came  in 


180 


ARISTOPIA. 


unbroken  families.  They  were  among  the  most 
skillful  mechanics  and  agriculturists  of  France, 
high-spirited  and  intelligent,  possessing  most 
of  the  high  virtues  and  noble  qualities  of  the 
English  Puritans,  without  their  gloomy  aus¬ 
terity  and  savage  bigotry  ;  and  they  soon 
became  excellent  citizens  of  their  adopted 
country.  Some  were  men  of  great  learning 
capable  of  becoming  professors  in  the  higher 
institutions  of  learning  in  Aristopia. 

The  manner  of  the  Huguenots’  exile  rendered 
it  easy  to  direct  their  emigration  to  Aristopia, 
and  very  fortunate  it  was  for  them  that  such 
an  asylum  and  such  assistance  in  reaching  it 
were  at  hand.  The  emigration  of  the  Hu¬ 
guenots  was  made  a  felony,  and  the  frontiers 
were  guarded  to  prevent  it.  The  property  of  the 
dying  Protestant  was  by  law  left  to  the  one  of 
his  family  who  should  renounce  his  religion. 
Soldiers  were  quartered  in  Huguenot  families  to 
prevent  them  from  the  exercise  of  their  religion 
and  to  guard  against  -their  emigration.  Those 
who  escaped  must  leave  their  property  behind. 
Sad  enough  and  hard  enouo-h  is  the  lot  of  the 
exile  when  he  can  take  a  little  property  with 
him,  but  infinitely  harder  when  thrown  empty- 
handed  among  a  strange  and  unsympathizing 


ARISTOPIA. 


181 


people — not  the  strong  man  with  only  his 
own  wants  to  provide  for,  but  the  father  with 
his  wife  and  babes.  What  fortune,  then,  to 
find  free  passage  to  a  land  where  nature’s 
bounty  was  lavish  and  to  a  great  extent  unap¬ 
propriated,  and  to  a  commonwealth  whose  lead¬ 
ing  principle  was  the  public  weal,  not  the  greed 
of  gain  at  the  expense  of  others,  whose  motto 
was  “  non  sibi,  sed  aliis  ” — not  for  one’s  self 
but  for  others  ! 

The  Huguenots,  adding  their  peculiar  quali¬ 
ties  to  those  of  the  English,  Germans,  and  Irish, 
very  greatly  and  beneficially  influenced  the  new 
composite  nation. 


182 


AEISTOPIA. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

The  venerable  Ralph  Morton  lived  but  a 
few  months  after  the  abdication  of  James.  He 
was  in  his  hundredth  year.  To  very  few  of 
the  human  race  is  it  given  to  live  and  retain 
their  faculties  for  a  round  century.  Well 
would  it  be  if  all  these  centenarians  were  such 
as  Ralph  Morton. 

For  many  years  he  had  left  to  a  subordinate 
the  arduous  labors  of  the  chief  executive’s 
office  and  had  undertaken  no  task  beyond  his 
strength.  He  became  rather  an  adviser  than 
an  executive.  Feeling  that  his  end  was  near, 
and  wishing  to  see  his  successor  installed,  he 
resigned  his  office.  The  people  elected  his  son 
Charles  as  governor  for  a  term  of  five  years. 

Ralph  Morton  had  married,  when  about 
thirty,  a  young  and  comely  woman  who  had 
come  over  to  Mortonia  to  teach  school.  By 
this  union  he  had  no  son  who  survived  him. 
At  the  age  of  about  fifty  he  had  married  again, 


ARISTOPIA. 


183 


and  Charles  Morton  was  the  oldest  son  by  this 
marriage.  This  son  was,  what  too  few  sons 
of  great  and  good  men  are,  entirely  worthy  of 
his  father.  Free  from  avarice,  arrogance,  love 
of  ostentation  and  luxury  ;  desiring  power  and 
wealth  only  that  he  might  do  good  with  them ; 
a  philanthropist  with  an  abiding  faith  in  the 
ultimate  high  destiny  of  the  human  race;  an 
earnest  friend  of  progress,  but  opposing  change 
for  the  mere  sake  of  novelty  ;  without  bigotry, 
believing  that  the  truest  and  most  acceptable 
worship  of  God  is  the  doing  good  to  His  creat¬ 
ures  ;  he  was  the  man  above  all  others  whom 
Ralph  Morton  desired  as  his  successor,  although 
he  had  never  urged  his  election,  which  was  a 
spontaneous  tribute  of  a  grateful  people  to  a 
benefactor  whom  they  could  little  requite  for 
all  his  benefactions. 

Ralph  Morton  bequeathed  to  the  common¬ 
wealth  in  fee  simple  all  the  lands  of  which  the 
royal  charter  made  him  lord  proprietor,  except 
a  few  acres  about  the  mine,  with  the  condition 
that  the  cardinal  principles  of  the  Constitution 
in  respect  to  private  ownership  and  monopoly 
of  soil,  forests,  mines,  waters,  etc.,  should  never 
be  violated.  In  case  of  such  violation  the  lands 
in  respect  to  which  the  violation  should  occur 


184 


ABISTOPIA. 


should  immediately  revert  to  the  heirs  of  Ealph 
Morton. 

He  2*ave  to  each  of  his  living  children  and 

O  O 

the  representatives  of  such  as  were  dead  ten 
thousand  dollars,  with  the  request  that  they 
should  use  the  advantages  the  wealth  gave 
them  for  the  benefit  of  their  country  and 
humanity.  The  mine  he  gave  to  his  son 
Charles,  on  receiving  a  solemn  pledge  that  the 
gold  should  be  used  for  the  public  good.  The 
stone  had  been  dug  away  from  the  mass  for 
its  whole  length  and  depth  down  to  where,  in 
miner’s  phrase,  the  deposit  “  pinched  out.” 
Several  millions  of  dollars’  worth  were  still  left, 
sufficient  for  many  years  of  use  in  assisting  im¬ 
migration,  maintaining  institutions  of  learning, 
and  aiding  the  advancement  of  science;  to 
these  uses  the  new  Governor  Morton  resolved 
to  devote  the  gold. 

At  the  time  of  his  retirement,  Governor  Ealph 
Morton  issued  a  farewell  address  to  the  people 
of  Aristopia,  which,  in  the  main,  he  had  com¬ 
posed  many  years  before,  while  his  mental 
powers  were  in  full  vigor,  only  modifying  it 
somewhat  as  the  flight  of  years  opened  to  him 
new  views  and  furnished  him  new  illustrations. 
He  not  only  drew  upon  the  historical  studies  of 


APIS  TOPI  A. 


185 


his  youth,  hut  on  the  experiences  of  his  long 
life.  He  hud  kept  himself  fully  informed,  by 
means  of  his  wide  correspondence,  of  all  public 
events  of  both  Europe  and  America. 

He  urged  his  people  to  guard  their  liberties 
with  unremitting  and  unending  vigilance.  He 

o  o  o 

pointed  out  the  dangers  to  which  these  liberties 
would  be  exposed  and  whence  would  probably 
come  the  assaults  upon  them;  that  these 
assaults  would  not  be  hold,  abrupt,  and  open, 
but  stealthy,  insidious,  and  gradual.  With 
every  succeeding  generation  the  dangers  to 
popular  liberty  from  the  despotism  of  hered¬ 
itary  monarchy  and  aristocracy  would  grow 
less.  With  increasing  and  advancing  civil¬ 
ization  another  kind  of  despotism — the  des¬ 
potism  of  wealth — would  become  more  and 
more  dangerous.  This  despotism  might  be 
hereditary,  the  slow  growth  of  generations,  or 
it  might  be  the  sudden  growth  of  a  score  or 
two  of  years.  In  a  new  country,  where  so 
much  of  nature’s  wealth  was  unappropriated 
and  so  wide  a  scope  was  offered  for  those  ex¬ 
celling  in  greed,  cunning,  and  strength  to 
grasp  this  unappropriated  wealth,  the  sudden 
acquisition  of  great  riches  might  be  looked  for 
in  many  cases. 


186 


ARISTOPIA. 


He  warned  the  people  that  the  greatest 
dangers  to  liberty  might  be  covered  by  the 
most  specious  pleas  for  liberty  itself.  He 
warned  them  that  the  wealthy  and  strong  would 
plead  for  liberty — the  liberty  to  oppress  the 
weak  and  helpless,  to  rob  them,  not  boldly  and 
openly,  with  the  coarse  methods  of  the  high¬ 
wayman,  but  stealthily  and  under  the  pretence 
of  fair  and  open  “  business.”  But  the  result 
would  be  exactly  that  accomplished  by  the  high¬ 
waymen  :  the  acquisition  of  wealth  without 
rendering  an  equivalent. 

Absolute  equality  of  wealth,  however  desir¬ 
able,  could  not  be  attained  except  in  a  com¬ 
munity  in  which  the  individual  was  controlled 
in  all  financial  matters  by  the  society;  other¬ 
wise  the  improvident  and  incapable  would 
surely  become  and  remain  poor.  As  society  is 
obliged  in  the  end  to  care  for  the  improvident 
and  incapable,  it  is  a  question  when  that  care 
ought  to  begin  and  how  far  prevention  ought 
to  be  substituted  for  alleviation,  especially 
when  it  is  considered  that  the  incapable  one 
is  often  the  head  of  a  family,  dragging 
down  to  poverty  those  naturally  dependent 
upon  him.  But  without  any  question,  preven¬ 
tion  ought  to  be  used  against  the  great  and 


AEISTOPIA. 


187 


dangerous  accumulation  of  wealth  by  indi¬ 
viduals  and  associations  not  public.  Great 
wealth  in  the  bands  of  a  few  must  with  the 
utmost  certainty  be  balanced  by  the  poverty 
of  many.  The  dangers  and  injustice  to  society 
of  this  are  so  great  that  no  specious  plea  for 
liberty  must  be  allowed  to  cover  the  acquisition 
of  undue  wealth.  The  liberty  of  the  strong 
and  capable  to  get  all  they  can  and  keep  all 
they  get,  although  obtained  at  the  expense  of 
the  weak  and  incapable,  is  only  the  liberty 
of  the  highwayman  glossed  over  and  refined 
by  subtle  methods  ;  the  liberty  of  the  bold 
and  strong  to  do  as  they  please  with  the  weak 
and  timid,  the  liberty  of  the  shrewd  and  cun¬ 
ning  to  deal  as  they  can  and  will  with  the 
simple  and  uncalculating,  is  a  sort  of  anarchy. 

He  warned  the  people  especially  against  the 
dangers  from  corporations,  which  were  then 
beginning  to  grow  strong  in  England.  He 
had  seen  a  good  specimen  of  corporation  rule 
in  the  early  settlement  of  Virginia.  A  corpo¬ 
ration  is  the  very  worst  of  rulers.  It  has  all 
the  vices  of  the  avarice,  greed,  selfishness,  and 
cruelty  of  all  its  members  combined  and  in¬ 
creased  in  geometrical  ratio  by  the  combination, 
with  none  of  the  virtues  of  the  benevolence  and 


188 


ARISTOPIA. 


generosity  of  its  separate  members.  It  is  deaf 
to  the  voice  of  mercy,  insensible  to  the  pangs 
of  remorse  and  the  scourge  of  shame,  and 
untouched  by  the  sentiment  of  gratitude. 
Vain  against  corporations  are  laws  relating  to 
heredity,  for  corporations  may  perpetuate  them¬ 
selves  and  live  through  generations.  Above 
all,  he  warned  the  people  against  giving  a 
corporation  any  monopoly.  Dangerous  and 
evil  as  is  any  monopoly  in  the  hands  of  an  in¬ 
dividual,  in  the  grasp  of  a  corporation  its  evil  is 
multiplied  infinitely.  Although  a  corporation 
has  no  soul,  it  may  have  a  head,  who,  wielding 
its  vast  power  with  a  single  will,  may  make 
of  himself  a  most  dangerous  despot. 

This  paper,  of  which  only  a  brief,  dry  out¬ 
line  is  here  given,  was  written  with  a  vividness 
of  color,  a  depth  and  warmth  of  feeling,  an 
aptness  of  expression,  a  strength  of  argument, 
a  force,  and  fire,  and  fervor  which  were  possible 
only  to  a  man  of  high  genius,  with  a  soul 
aflame  with  love  of  right  and  hatred  of  wrong. 

The  address  became  a  classic  in  Aristopia, 
and  was  read  and  declaimed  by  every  youth  in 
every  school  for  generation  after  generation. 
Its  influence  was  greater  than  that  of  future 
presidents  and  congresses.  Its  maxims  had 
more  than  the  force  of  laws. 


ARISTOPIA. 


189 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

The  arduous  task  of  King  William  in  firmly 
establishing  the  throne  which  lie  had  acquired 
in  so  peculiar  a  manner,  left  him  little  time  in 
the  early  part  of  his  reign  to  meddle  with  the 
American  colonies  ;  hut  in  after  years  he  re¬ 
duced  Maryland  to  a  royal  colony  and  meddled 
considerably  with  the  charter  of  Massachusetts, 
probably  because  the  proprietor  of  the  former 
colony  was  a  Catholic,  while  the  latter  colony 
was  offensively  Puritan.  But  Aristopia  came 
little  under  his  notice.  His  campaign  against 
the  exiled  King  James  in  Ireland  led  to  fur¬ 
ther  measures  against  that  unhappy  country 
resembling  those  of  Cromwell.  Nearly  the 
whole  Irish  population  of  the  province  of  Ulster 
was  driven  out.  Many  thousands  of  these  ex¬ 
iles  were  brought  to  Aristopia,  where  they  fur¬ 
nished  very  crude  but  in  the  end  very  valuable 
material  for  citizenship,  as  we  have  seen  in  the 
case  of  those  driven  out  by  Cromwell. 

By  the  time  those  were  settled  in  Aristopia, 


190 


ABISTOPIA. 


the  valley  of  the  Ohio  from  its  source  at  the 
junction  of  the  Alleghany  and  the  Mononga- 
hela  to  its  mouth  was  thickly  settled.  At  the 
junction  just  mentioned  a  flourishing  town 
called  Columbus  was  established,  and  became 
the  seat  of  an  extensive  iron-smelting  industry. 
The  old  trading-posts  on  the  Ohio  and  the 
Mississippi  had  become  large  towns.  New 
trading  posts  had  been  established  far  westward 
up  the  Mizouri,  and  northward  up  the  Missis¬ 
sippi. 

Lead  in  abundance  had  been  discovered  in 
the  region  west  of  the  Mississippi,  not  far  from 
that  river,  and  considerable  mining  settlements 
had  been  formed.  Zinc  ore  was  also  found  in 
the  vicinity  of  the  lead  ore. 

The  Indians  who  came  to  trade  at  the  posts 
on  the  upper  Mississippi  had  knives,  hatchets, 
and  arrow-heads  cast  of  copper,  evidently  of 
native  manufacture.  Some  of  the  Indians  re¬ 
vealed  the  existence  of  large  deposits  of  pure 
metallic  copper,  which  they  said  were  situated 
near  the  shores  of  a  vast  lake  or  fresh- water 
sea  far  to  the  north.  These  Indians  were  in¬ 
duced  by  rich  presents  to  conduct  an  explor¬ 
ing  party  to  the  mines.  With  the  party  were 
experts  in  minerals  and  a  mathematician  to  de- 


ARISTOPIA. 


191 


termine  tlie  latitude  and  longitude  of  the  places 
visited.  The  party  set  out  from  a  post  on  the 
Mississippi  about  five  hundred  miles  (by  river) 
above  the  mouth  of  the  Mizouri  and  traveled 
nearly  four  hundred  miles  in  a  northerly  di¬ 
rection,  over  rugged  hills  and  broad  plains, 
narrow  prairies  and  extensive  forests,  first  of 
hard  woods  and  later  of  great  pines.  At  last 
they  came  to  the  shore  of  a  lake  so  vast  that  it 
seemed  like  a  sea.  Near  the  lake  they  found 
many  outcroppings  of  metallic  copper  and 
copper  ore,  with  indications  that  much  greater 
quantities  could  he  obtained  by  mining. 

The  Indians  informed  the  explorers  that  an¬ 
other  great  lake  lay  off  to  the  southeast  of  the 
copper  mines,  on  which  they  could,  by  going 
southward,  reach  a  point  less  than  six  days’ 
journey  from  the  Mississippi.  It  was  deter¬ 
mined  that  on  reaching  this  lake  a  few  of  the 
party  should  go  by  canoes  as  far  as  possible, 
leaving  the  rest  of  the  party  to  return  by  nearly 
the  same  route  as  they  came. 

Crossing  the  peninsula  separating  the  two 
great  lakes,  a  party  of  five  white  men,  includ¬ 
ing  the  mathematician,  and  two  Indian  guides, 
embarked  in  birch  canoes  and  set  out  south¬ 
ward  along  the  shore  of  the  great  and  solitary 


192 


ARISTOPIA. 


lake.  After  a  long  journey  southward  they 
found  the  shore  of  the  lake  trending  too  much 
to  the  east,  when  they  abandoned  their  canoes 
and  struck  out  on  foot  over  the  vast  prairie, 
with  the  setting  sun  as  their  guide.  In  due 
time  they  reached  the  great  river,  and  were  soon 
at  a  trading-post. 

Copper  was  a  metal  very  much  needed  in 
Aristopia.  Unalloyed  and  in  brass  and  bronze 
it  was  far  better  adapted  to  many  uses  than 
iron,  which  was  very  plentiful  in  the  country. 
There  was  plenty  of  zinc  from  which  to  make 
brass,  but  all  the  copper  used  had  to  be  im¬ 
ported  from  Europe.  So  it  was  decided  by  the 
government  of  Aristopia  to  take  possession  of 
these  copper  mines,  although  they  were  far  be¬ 
yond  the  charter  limits  of  the  commonwealth. 

The  Elenwah  River,  emptying  into  the 
Mississippi  about  twenty-five  miles  above  the 
mouth  of  the  Mizouri,  could  be  ascended  by 
horse-boats  to  within  about  a  hundred  miles  of 
the  shore  of  the  great  Lake  Michigan.  At 
this  head  of  navigation  a  post  was  established. 
A  fort  was  built  of  prairie  sods,  and  armed 
with  three  six-pound  cannons.  Houses  were 
built  of  lumber,  brought  up  on  the  boats.  For 
the  post  on  Lake  Michigan  a  point  was  selected 


ARISTOPIA . 


193 


at  the  mouth  of  a  small  river  called  the  Sheca^o. 
The  mouth  of  tlie  river  would  form  a  port  for 
vessels  used  on  the  lake.  As  there  was  no 
timber  for  building  and  fuel  here,  a  post  was 
not  immediately  established  ;  but  a  strong 
party  with  all  the  necessary  tools  was  sent 
northward  along-  the  shore  of  the  lake  until  a 
spot  was  found  where  there  was  plenty  of  good 
timber,  and  a  small  river  running  into  the  lake 
which  would  furnish  water-power  for  a  saw-mill. 
Here  a  post  called  Sheboygan  was  established, 
and  a  saw-mill  erected.  From  the  lumber  sawn 
two  sailing  vessels  were  built.  The  first  one, 
which  was  finished  immediately,  took  a  cargo 
of  lumber  to  the  mouth  of  the  Shecago  River, 
where  a  post  called  Shecago  was  established. 
The  western  and  northern  shores  of  Lake 
Michigan  were  explored  with  a  view  to  finding 
a  passage  into  the  other  lake,  called  Lake 
Tracy  or  Superior.  It  was  found,  however, 
that  in  the  river  between  the  two  lakes  were 
rapids  which  prevented  navigation.  So  another 
post,  called  Escanaba,  was  established  at  the 
head  of  a  little  bay  at  the  north  end  of  Lake 
Michigan.  From  this  point  a  road  was  cut 
through  the  woods  to  the  shore  of  Lake 

Superior,  a  distance  of  about  forty-five  miles. 

13 


I 


194 


ARISTOPIA. 


On  the  shore  of  Lake  Superior  another  post, 
called  Fort  Neenah,  was  established  and  another 
saw-mill  erected.  A  vessel  of  about  twenty 
tons  was  built  to  ply  between  FortNeenah  and 
the  mines,  where  a  post  called  Fort  Copper  was 
established. 

In  this  systematic  and  thorough  manner  a 
line  of  communication  was  established  between 
the  western  settlements  of  Aristopia  and  the 
far-off  northern  mines,  which  left  only  two 
short  journeys  overland  to  be  made.  Thus, 
before  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century, 
the  white  sails  of  staunch  vessels,  manned  by 
English-speaking  crews,  could  be  seen  on  these 
lonely  inland  seas,  of  whose  very  existence  the 
people  of  England  were  ignorant,  supposing 
that  in  their  place  rolled  the  salt  waves  of  the 
great  South  Sea. 

This  extension  of  the  outposts  of  Aristopia 
not  only  supplied  the  colony  with  a  large  amount 
of  copper,  but  greatly  increased  its  fur  trade, 
by  extending  it  into  a  new  region.  In  this 
high  northern  latitude,  too,  the  furs  were  of 
the  best  quality. 

The  determination  which  Ralph  Morton  took 
to  occupy  with  his  colony  the  interior  instead 
of  the  coast  region,  with  the  results  that  flowed 


ARISTOPIA. 


195 


from  that  determination,  effectually  blocked  a 
game  which  France  had  begun  to  play  more 
than  a  century  before  the  events  described  in 
this  chapter,  viz :  the  occupation  of  the  interior 
of  the  vast  continent  which  the  English  for  a 
long  time  thought  so  narrow  and  of  which 
they  seized  only  the  Atlantic  coast.  The  fur 
traders  of  the  French  early  pushed  up  the  St. 
Lawrence  to  Lake  Ontario,  and  later  the  ardent 
and  courageous  missionaries  went  much  farther. 
Later  still  a  French  colony  occupied  the  lower 
Mississippi,  and  the  natural  result  would  have 
been  a  final  union  of  these  colonies  by  the 
pathway  of  the  Mississippi,  Ohio,  and  the  great 
lakes.  But  the  settlements  of  Aristopia  blocked 
the  way. 

In  1673  a  party  composed  of  Marquette,  a 
missionary  who  had  spent  several  years  in  the 
region  of  the  great  lakes,  Joliet,  a  Quebec 
trader,  five  other  Frenchmen,  and  two  Algon- 
quins,  ascended  a  river  flowing  into  Lake  Mich¬ 
igan  to  a  place  where  a  short  portage  enabled 
them  to  launch  their  canoes  in  another  broad 
but  shallow  river  flowing  southwestward. 
This  river  was  named  by  the  French  Ouis- 
quondsen  (later  spelled  Ouisconsin).  Here  the 
Indian  guides  deserted  the  party,  and  the 


196 


ABISTOPIA. 


Frenchmen  proceeded  down  the  stream  in 
search  of  a  greater  river  of  which  they  had 
heard. 

After  seven  days  of  floating  and  paddling, 
they  came  into  this  great  river  and  began  to 
descend.  They  saw,  indeed,  a  magnificent 
stream,  its  great  volume  in  some  places  flowing 
in  one  broad  channel,  at  other  places  dividing 
and  running'  among  islands  covered  to  the 

o  o 

water’s  edge  with  willow  and  birch.  The  val¬ 
ley  they  saw  flanked  with  high  bluffs,  in  places 
rising  in  smooth,  green  ramparts,  crowned  with 
oak  groves,  in  other  places  perpendicular  lime¬ 
stone  cliffs.  Descending  a  hundred  miles,  the 
valley  broadened  out  and  the  great  bluffs  sunk 
into  low,  rounded  hills.  The  water  rippled 
clear  in  the  sunshine  on  the  sandy  banks, 
sprinkled  with  many-hued  pebbles,  for  here  the 
great  river  had  not  been  polluted  by  the  turbid 
tide  of  the  Mizouri. 

They  had  been  told  by  the  Indians  that 
white  men  were  settled  on  the  banks  of  the 
great  river,  but  they  concluded  that  in  their 
imperfect  knowledge  of  the  language  they  had 
misunderstood ;  they  were  sure  the  region  had 
never  been  seen  by  any  Europeans  except  them¬ 
selves.  Great,  then,  was  their  surprise  when, 


ARISTOPIA. 


197 


after  descending  about  two  hundred  and  fifty 
miles  from  the  mouth  of  the  Ouisconsin,  and 
supposing  themselves  in  a  vast  solitude  so  far 
from  civilization  that  the  thought  was  over- 
awing,  they  saw  upon  the  eastern  bank  a  vil¬ 
lage  of  about  fifty  houses,  with  outlying  farms 
and  farm-houses,  all  of  civilized  style,  and  a 
fort  over  which  floated  the  well-known  flag  of 
England,  and  a  banner  bearing  three  bars  of 
red,  white,  and  blue.  Going  ashore,  they 
learned  that  it  was  the  outpost  of  the  Colony 
of  Aristopia,  and  was  called  Oquawka.  The 
Frenchmen  had  heard  of  Aristopia,  but  had 
not  supposed  that  its  outposts  were  within  five 
hundred  miles  of  the  great  river.  When  they 
learned  that  down  the  river  were  other  towns, 
one  of  which  contained  fifteen  hundred  inhab¬ 
itants,  Joliet  said  to  Marquette  : 

“  These  cursed  English  will  populate  the 
whole  earth  some  time.” 

66  Meanwhile,”  answered  Marquette,  “  they 
bar  the  way  to  the  spread  of  the  true  religion 
of  the  holy  cross  among  the  heathen  of  this 
fair  land.” 

The  bright  visions  in  which  the  Frenchmen 

O 

had  been  indulging,  while  floating  down  the 
great  river,  of  seeing  this  noble  valley,  with  a 


198 


ARISTOPIA. 


climate  so  much  more  genial  than  that  of  the 
St.  Lawrence,  peopled  with  Frenchmen,  van¬ 
ished.  They  saw  that  France  was  completely 
forestalled.  After  a  few  days’  rest,  being 
treated  very  hospitably,  they  returned  to  New 
France  as  they  came. 

The  war  which  broke  out  between  France 
and  England  on  the  accession  of  William  III., 
and  lasted,  with  a  short  intermission,  until  1713, 
into  which  the  American  colonies  were  dragged, 
had  no  effect  on  Aristopia.  The  French  and 
their  allies,  the  Algonquins,  made  from  their 
posts  on  the  St.  Lawrence  several  bloody  raids 
on  the  exposed  settlements  of  New  England 
and  eastern  New  York,  accompanied  with  great 
atrocities.  But  the  powerful  Iroquois,  the  im¬ 
placable  enemies  of  the  French  and  the  allies 
of  the  English,  barred  the  way  of  the  French  to 
the  west,  compelling  them  to  evacuate  Forts 
Niagara  and  Frontenac,  respectively,  at  the  in¬ 
let  and  outlet  of  Lake  Ontario.  The  Mohawks, 
one  of  the  Iroquois  tribes,  even  made  a  bloody 
raid  on  Montreal.  The  French  afterward  made 
peace  with  the  Iroquois,  hut  during  the  war 
had  not  force  enough  west  of  Niagara  Falls  to 
threaten  Aristopia. 


ARISTOPIA. 


199 


CHAPTER  XX. 

Charles  Morton  was  elected  Governor  of 
Aristopia  for  three  successive  terms  of  five 
years  each,  and  then  declined  another  term. 
He  believed  the  political  principles  held  so 
dear  by  the  founder  of  the  commonwealth  had 
become  so  firmly  imbedded  in  the  institutions 
and  public  life  of  Aristopia  that  they  were  in 
little  danger  of  ever  being  eradicated,  and  he 
wished  the  people  to  become  accustomed  to  a 
change  of  executives,  and  above  all  that  they 
should  not  come  to  consider  the  office  to  be 
hereditary.  So  he  was  pleased  when  a  person 
not  a  member  of  his  family  was  elected  as  his 
successor.  Members  of  the  family,  however, 
had  become  members  of  Congress,  and  one  of 
them  was  a  judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the 
Commonwealth. 

Governor  Charles  Morton,  not  long  after  his 
first  election,  began  gradually  to  give  up  the 
free  transportation  of  immigrants  and  to  dispose 
of  the  many  vessels  his  father  had  employed 


200 


ARISTOPIA . 


for  that  purpose.  Very  many  people  would 
come  to  Aristopia  at  their  own  expense,  and 
the  inhabitants  of  the  commonwealth  could 
well  assist  many  of  their  poor  relatives  to  come 
over. 

After  he  had  retired  from  the  governorship 
he  rendered  the  commonwealth  a  service  which, 
although  it  seemed  small  at  first,  became  very 
great  a  generation  afterward.  The  colonists 
had  introduced  sheep  as  soon  as  they  had 
clearings  sufficient  for  sheep-pastures  not  too 
much  exposed  to  the  wolves ;  but  circumstances 
were  unfavorable  for  an  improvement  of  the 
breed,  which  became  inferior.  In  England 
more  favorable  circumstances  had  enabled 
breeders  to  develop  much  improved  breeds. 
But  the  jealous  land  owners  had  procured  the 
enactment  of  laws  forbidding  the  exportation 
of  sheep,  on  penalty  of  having  the  right  hand 
cut  off,  and  exportation  did  not  offer  sufficient 
profit  to  induce  an  ordinary  individual  to  risk 
the  terrible  penalty. 

Ex-Governor  Morton  employed  the  captain 
of  a  privateer,  with  a  strong,  bold  crew,  to 
make  an  importation  of  Cotswold  sheep.  One 
of  his  agents  in  England  rented  a  wild  piece 
of  land  on  the  western  coast  of  England  for  a* 


ARISTOPIA. 


201 


pasture,  and  brought  there  more  than  a  hun¬ 
dred  Cots  wold  ewes  and  a  few  of  the  finest 
bucks  to  be  obtained.  One  day,  toward  even¬ 
ing,  the  rover  appeared  off  this  coast.  At 
night  the  crew  landed,  provided  with  a  launch 
or  flat-boat  large  enough  to  take  off  all  the 
sheep.  The  coast-guard  were  on  the  watch, 
thinking  the  vessel  a  smuggler.  They  attacked 
the  crew  while  the  latter  were  in  the  act  of 
loading  the  sheep,  but  the  crew  was  far  stronger 
than  the  guard  expected,  and  the  attack  was 
easily  repulsed.  The  sheep  were  safely  loaded, 
and  before  daylight  the  bold  rover  was  out  of 
sight  of  the  English  coast.  The  sheep  were 
duly  landed,  the  captain  of  the  rover  receiving 
three  thousand  pounds  for  his  venture.  The 
flock  was  carefully  nursed  and  increased  rapidly, 
so  that  in  time  they  supplied  not  only  Aris- 
topia,  but  the  other  American  colonies,  with  a 
much  improved  breed,  adding  millions  of  dol¬ 
lars  to  the  wealth  of  America. 

Charles  Morton  took  from  the  mine  all  the 
gold  which  was  easily  accessible,  placing  all  he 
did  not  use  for  current  expenses  in  the  bank 
of  Amsterdam.  Before  his  death,  which  oc¬ 
curred  when  he  was  about  eighty,  he  gave  five 
thousand  dollars  to  each  of  his  living  sons  and 


202 


ARISTOPIA . 


daughters  and  to  each  family  of  the  two  who 
had  died.  He  left  in  the  bank  of  Amsterdam 
three  million  dollars,  which,  with  the  accrued 
interest,  was  to  be  used  by  the  commonwealth 
at  a  certain  crisis,  which  he  foretold  in  a  letter 
which  he  had  the  governor  read  and  then  seal 
up  and  reserve  for  his  successor.  Each  gover¬ 
nor  of  Aristopia  on  his  accession  was  to  open 
and  read  this  letter,  and  then  seal  it  and  leave 
it  for  his  successor,  first  solemnly  promising 
never  to  reveal  the  contents  of  the  letter  until 
the  crisis  should  arrive,  when  he  was  to  draw 
upon  the  fund  and  use  it  for  the  common¬ 
wealth. 

In  the  war  between  England  and  France, 
from  1744  to  1748,  Aristopia  had  to  defend 
itself  vigorously  against  the  French,  who  had 
become  considerably  numerous  in  the  western 
part  of  Canada,  and  their  Indian  allies.  The 
posts  on  the  route  to  the  copper  mines  had  to 
be  strongly  fortified,  and  the  vessels  on  Lake 
Michigan  heavily  armed.  But  Aristopia  was 
ten  times  as  strong  as  all  New  France,  and  the 
Aristopians  captured  the  forts  of  the  French  at 
Mackinaw  and  Detroit,  and  easily  routed  their 
Algonquin  allies.  The  French  never  were  able 
to  seduce  the  0  jib  ways,  Sauks,  and  Foxes  from 


ARISTOPIA. 


203 


their  friendship  to  the  Aristopians.  Aristopia 
also  sent  a  thousand  soldiers  to  the  assistance 
of  New  England  in  the  war. 

Immediately  after  the  close  of  this  war,  com¬ 
merce  between  Aristopia  and  the  new  French 
colony  of  Louisiana,  which  began  before  the 
war,  very  greatly  increased.  The  annoying 
and  oppressive  restrictions  laid  by  the  English 
Parliament  on  American  manufactures  and 
commerce  stimulated  this  commerce  with  Louisi¬ 
ana,  until  in  a  few  years  Aristopia  almost  aban¬ 
doned  its  commerce  by  its  Atlantic  port,  Mor- 
tonia.  Manufactures  in  the  colonies,  if  not 
absolutely  forbidden,  were  very  much  restricted 
by  the  prohibition  to  carry  any  article  manu¬ 
factured  in  one  “  plantation  ”  into  another  or 
to  any  other  country.  The  colonies  had  now 
to  deal  not  with  the  King  alone,  nor  even  with 
Parliament  alone,  but  with  the  merchant  and 
landlord  class  of  England.  Great  Britain  was 
governed  by  a  Parliament  of  merchants  and 
landowners,  and  English  legislation  was  sur¬ 
rendered  to  the  traders’  and  the  landlords’ 
selfish  and  short-sighted  greed  of  gain. 

The  exports  of  Aristopia  to  Louisiana  con¬ 
sisted  of  flour,  potatoes,  oats,  lumber,  furs  and 
pelts,  wool,  shoes,  nails  and  other  heavy  iron 


204 


ARISTOPIA. 


manufactures,  and  wooden  ware.  Its  imports 
were  sugar,  tea,  rice,  lemons,  fine  cloths, 
needles,  pins,  thread,  buttons,  fine  cutlery, 
watches,  musical  instruments,  etc.  As  the 
exports  were  much  more  heavy  and  bulky  than 
the  imports,  more  shipping  was  needed  to 
carry  them.  Thus,  while  the  imports  were 
brought  up  the  Mississippi  and  Ohio  on  horse- 
boats,  much  of  the  exports  was  floated  down 
on  flat-boats  rudely  and  cheaply  constructed, 
which  were  broken  up  and  sold  for  lumber  at 
New  Orleans.  Some  of  the  flat-boatmen  re¬ 
turned  home  on  the  horse-boats,  but  most  of 
them  by  land,  as  the  distance  from  New 
Orleans  to  the  Ohio  overland  was  only  about 
half  that  by  river,  and  the  horse-boats  made 
slow  progress  up  stream,  against  the  powerful 
current. 

If  these  flat-boatmen  had  belonged  to  any 
other  community  they  would  have  been  left  to 
find  their  way  home  through  the  wilderness  as 
best  they  could,  each  man  for  himself.  But 
they  were  engaged  in  the  business  of  the  com¬ 
monwealth,  and  the  commonwealth  cared  care¬ 
fully  for  them.  A  route  was  surveyed  and  a 
good  path  cleared  through  tangled  thickets 
and  cane-brakes ;  creeks  and  morasses  were 


ARISTOPIA . 


205 


bridged  with  commodious  foot-logs ;  on  streams 
too  wide  to  be  bridged,  boats  were  placed  for 
ferriage.  At  every  twenty  miles  on  the  route 
a  strong  log-house  was  built,  where  parties  of 
boatmen  might  sleep,  secure  from  savages  and 
sheltered  from  storms.  At  two  points  on  the 
route  posts  were  established  and  garrisoned, 
where  the  travelers  could  replenish  their  stock 
of  food  for  the  journey.  These  places  also 
served  as  posts  for  the  purchase  of  furs  from 
the  Indians. 

Another  war,  in  which  the  American  colonies 
took  part,  broke  out  in  1755,  between  England 
and  France,  for  the  possession  of  Canada. 
Aristopia  was  in  principle  opposed  to  a  war  of 
conquest,  but  such  was  the  animosity  of  the 
French  in  Canada,  such  their  persistency  in 
striving  to  incite  the  Indians  against  all  the 
English  colonies,  and  their  determination  to 
prevent  any  further  extension  of  those  colonies, 
that  Aristopia  saw  that  in  self-defense  the 
French  must  be  driven  from  the  upper  lakes. 
A  strong  land-force,  co-operating  with  heavily 
armed  vessels  from  Lake  Michigan,  captured 
all  the  French  posts  as  far  east  as  Niagara, 
sent  the  soldiers  prisoners  into  the  eastern  part 
of  Aristopia,  and  disarmed  all  the  French  set- 


206 


ARISTOPIA. 


tiers.  The  commonwealth  also  sent  five  thou¬ 
sand  well-drilled,  well-armed,  and  well-equipped 
soldiers  to  assist  New  England  and  New  York., 
Along  the  St.  Lawrence,  the  French  were 
much  stronger  than  in  the  west,  and  the 
Atlantic  colonies  were  not  nearly  so  strong  as 
Aristopia;  therefore  the  war  lingered  in  the 
east  for  several  years,  until,  finally,  the  French 
were  entirely  overcome.  Peace  between  Eng¬ 
land  and  France  was  declared,  and  all  Canada 
and  the  region  east  of  the  Mississippi,  except 
a  small  part  of  Louisiana,  were  ceded  to  England. 

During  all  this  war,  Aristopia  maintained  its 
trade  with  New  Orleans,  keeping  a  sort  of 
tacit  truce  with  the  French  of  Louisiana,  while 
actively  fighting  those  of  Canada.  The  trade 
of  Aristopia  was  valuable  to  Louisiana;  the 
governor  of  that  province  had  fully  informed 
himself  of  the  overwhelming  strength  of  Aris- 
topia,  and  was  glad  of  the  opportunity  of  avoid¬ 
ing  a  hopeless  contest  with  the  great  northern 
commonwealth. 

At  the  beginning  of  this  war  occurred  the 
tragedy  of  the  exile  of  the  Acadians,  a  colony 
of  about  seven  thousand  French  in  the  western 
part  of  the  peninsula  lying  east  of  the  Bay  of 
Fundy.  The  English  having  conquered  this. 


A  RI STOP  I  A. 


207 


region,  the  authorities  thought  it  too  much 
trouble  and  expense  to  watch  the  inhabitants, 
and  did  not  want  them  to  retire  to  Quebec  to 
reinforce  the  French  there.  So  it  was  deter¬ 
mined  to  deport  all  the  inhabitants  of  Acadia. 

The  dreadful  business  was  carried  out  im¬ 
placably.  After  being  held  prisoners  some 
time  the  Acadians  were  driven  at  the  point  of 
the  bayonet  on  terribly  crowded  transports  to 
be  distributed  among*  the  English  colonies.  In 
many  cases  fathers  were  separated  from  their 
children  and  husbands  from  their  wives.  Be¬ 
fore  leaving  their  beloved  homes  the  Acadians 
had  the  grief  to  see  .them  burned  by  the  Eng¬ 
lish  soldiers.  Their  well  cultivated  lands,  their 
recently  gathered  harvests,  and  their  numerous 
live  stock  became  the  plunder  of  the  English 
officials. 

The  news  of  this  deportation  and  the  sepa¬ 
ration  of  the  Acadians  was  quickly  carried  to 
Aristopia,  where  it  created  the  greatest  in¬ 
dignation  and  sympathy  for  the  unfortunates. 
Congress  happened  to  be  in  session ;  an  appro¬ 
priation  was  immediately  made  to  bring  as 
many  of  the  Acadians  as  possible  to  Aristopia. 

The  English  intended  to  send  the  greater 
part  of  them  to  Massachusetts,  but  on  arriving 


208 


ARISTOPIA. 


there  the  people  refused  to  receive  them  ;  they 
shrank  in  horror  from  the  “  popish  dogs”  and 
the  countrymen  of  those  who  had  incited  the 
Indians  to  such  atrocious  massacres  as  those  of 
Cocheco  and  Haverhill.  Nor  was  New  York, 
which  had  passed  a  kiw  to  hang  every  Catholic 
priest  who  ventured  into  the  colony,  any  more 
hospitable  to  the  exiles.  With  Aristopia  it  was 
far  different.  A  large  part  of  its  population 
was  Catholic  and  another  large  part  of  French 
origin.  With  its  compact  and  formidable 
settlements  on  its  northern  frontier  it  had 
suffered  little  from  Indian  war,  and  had  no 
memories  of  massacres  to  keep  hatred  alive. 

Most  of  the  Acadians  were  brought  to  Aris- 
topia.  The  Mortons,  descendants  of  the  first 
Governor  of  Aristopia,  imbued  with  the  spirit 
of  their  ancestor,  headed  subscriptions  for  means 
to  seek  out  such  heads  of  families  as  had  been 
sent  to  other  colonies,  while  their  wives  and  chil¬ 
dren  had  reached  Aristopia,  and  unite  them  with 
their  families.  In  the  fraternal  commonwealth 
the  anguished  exiles  found  a  quiet  asylum 
But  the  government  of  Aristopia  tookcare  not 
to  settle  them  so  far  west  that  they  would  come 
in  contact  with  their  countrymen  in  Canada  or 
Louisiana,  to  whom  they  might  be  too  partial. 


ABISTOPIA. 


209 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

At  the  close  of  the  war,  England  began  an 
increased  taxation  of  the  colonies,  to  defray  its 
expenses.  Intense  dissatisfaction  was  produced 
as  one  tax  after  another  was  levied.  The 
Americans  now  saw  that  it  was  no  longer  the 
King  and  Parliament,  but  the  electors  of  Par¬ 
liament,  who  were  bent  on  oppressing  them. 
Every  village  shopkeeper  and  country  squire 
in  England  began  to  talk  of  the  taxes  which 
ought  to  be  imposed  on  u  our  subjects  in 
America.”  Seeing  this,  the  Americans  began 
to  think  of  separation,  and  talk  of  armed  resist¬ 
ance.  Aristopia  did  her  best  to  encourage  the 
other  colonies  to  resistance,  for  she  determined 
that  the  time  for  independence  had  almost 
arrived.  She  began  to  drill  great  numbers  of 
militia,  establish  foundries  for  cannon,  and 
factories  for  muskets  and  powder. 

In  some  great  caverns  in  Kentucky  saltpeter 
in  immense  quantities  had  been  discovered; 
Aristopia  could  manufacture  powder,  importing 
only  the  sulphur. 


210 


ARISTOPIA. 


The  population  of  the  commonwealth  in  1774 
had  become  fully  four  millions.  The  immigra¬ 
tion,  by  the  immense  expenditures  of  Ralph 
Morton,  had  been  such  as  the  world  had  never 
seen  elsewhere.  The  circumstances  of  life  were 
so  favorable  that  the  natural  increase  of  the 
colony,  by  the  excess  of  births  over  deaths,  was 
sufficient  to  double  the  population  every  thirty 
years  or  less,  exclusive  of  immigration.  The 
suppression  of  the  smallpox  by  vaccination  was 
sufficient  of  itself  to  give  the  commonwealth  an 
immense  advantage  over  other  countries. 

The  population  of  other  English  colonies, 
exclusive  of  Canada,  was  a  little  less  than  two 
and  a  half  millions.  Aristopia  had  doubtless 
drawn  off  some  people  who,  but  for  her,  would 
have  gone  to  the  Atlantic  colonies  ;  but  most 
of  her  immigrants  were  those  who  would  never 
have  reached  America  without  her  aid  :  the 
Irish  ;  the  poor  peasants  of  England,  Scotland, 
and  the  western  shores  of  the  continent ;  the 
people  of  the  far  inland  regions,  eastern  Ger¬ 
many,  Bohemia,  Poland,  Austria,  Switzerland, 
Savoy,  Lombardy,  and  V enice,  who  would  not 
have  come  to  America  but  for  the  far-reaching 
and  effective  Morton  agencies. 

O 

Aristopia,  for  convenience  of  administration 


ARISTOPIA. 


211 


of  public  affairs,  had  been  divided  into  six 
states  :  Alleghany,  extending  from  the  crest  of 
the  Alleghany  Mountains  on  the  east  to  the 
Alleghany,  Ohio,  and  Big  Sandy  rivers  on  the 
west;  Ohio,  bounded  on  the  east  and  south  by 
the  Alleghany  River  and  Ohio  River,  and  on 
west  by  the  eighty-fourth  meridian  ;  Columbia, 
extending  from  the  eighty-fourth  meridian  to 
the  W abash  River ;  Elenwah,  lying  between 
the  Wabash  and  the  Mississippi;  Mizouri,  ex¬ 
tending  from  the  Mississippi  indefinitely  west¬ 
ward  ;  and  Kentucky  including  all  of  Aristopia 
lying  south  of  the  Ohio  and  west  of  the  Big 
Sandy  River.  The  nominal  boundaries  of 
Aristopia  were  the  thirty-eighth  parallel  on  the 
south  and  the  forty-first  parallel  on  the  north  ; 
but  there  were  many  settlements  of  Aristopia 
beyond  those  lines,  especially  in  Kentucky. 
The  population  of  Alleghany  was  more  than  a 
million,  and  that  of  Ohio  nearly  a  million. 

Each  of  these  states  had  a  governor  and  a 
legislature  with  limited  legislative  powers  for 
local  government.  The  chief  executive  of  the 
commonwealth  was  now  called  the  Governor- 

In  popular  education,  the  condition  of  agri¬ 
culture  and  the  mechanical  arts,  Aristopia  was 


212 


A  Ii  IS  TOP  I  A. 


far  in  advance  of  the  Atlantic  colonies  and  in 
some  respects  of  England.  Virginia,  although 
the  most  populous  of  the  Atlantic  colonies, 
except  only  Massachusetts,  was  the  most  back¬ 
ward  in  civilization.  No  improvement  could 
be  expected  from  her  frontiersmen,  living  in 
semi-barbarism,  and  little  from  her  aristocratic 
and  indolent  planters,  and,  of  course,  none 
at  all  from  the  abject  white  servants  and 
still  more  abject  black  slaves  of  the  planters. 
The  colony  had  a  college  or  two  for  the 
sons  of  rich  planters,  but  few  public  schools 
for  the  common  people,  and  only  two  or  three 
printing-presses.  All  the  other  Atlantic  col¬ 
onies  south  of  Pennsylvania  were  like  Vir¬ 
ginia,  although  in  a  less  degree. 

In  Massachusetts,  improvement  was  checked 
by  another  cause — religious  bigotry  and  super¬ 
stition.  Although  there  were  printing-presses 
and  public  schools  in  the  colony,  the  teach¬ 
ing,  beyond  the  merest  rudiments  of  Eng¬ 
lish,  was  only  Latin  and  theology.  One  of 
their  own  writers  on  the  agriculture  of  New 
England  before  the  Revolution  says  :  “  The 
man  who  ventured  to  try  experiments  was 
looked  on  with  displeasure.  If  one  did  not 
plant  just  as  many  acres  of  corn  as  his  father 


ARISTOPIA. 


213 


did,  and  that,  too,  in  the  old  of  the  moon  ;  if 
he  did  not  sow  just  as  much  rye  to  the  acre 
and  use  the  same  number  of  oxen  to  the  plow; 
if  he  did  not  hoe  as  many  times  as  his  father 
and  grandfather  did  ;  if,  in  short,  he  did  not 
adopt  the  same  views  and  prejudices  his  father 
had  done,  he  was  shunned  in  the  company  of 
old  and  young,  and  looked  on  as  a  vision¬ 
ary-” 

They  had  near  them  a  fair  example  of  prog¬ 
ress  in  the  Dutch  settlers  of  the  Hudson  and 
Mohawk  valleys,  whose  industry  was  so  well 
seconded  by  ingenuity  and  improvement  as  to 
lead  to  great  comfort  and  prosperity ;  but  the 
Puritans  carefully  avoided  profiting  by  the  ex¬ 
ample.  When  shown  any  ingenious  device  for 
agricultural,  mechanical,  or  household  use,  the 
New  Englander  was  accustomed  to  say  :  “  It 
beats  the  Dutch  !  ”  While  he  said  aloud  :  “  It 
beats  the  Dutch,”  he  thought  to  himself :  “It 
beats  the  Devil  !  ”  for  to  his  mind  Satan  was 
the  father  of  innovations.  It  was  not  until  near 
the  Revolution  that  the  crust  of  bigotry  was 
broken  and  the  New  England  mind  began  to 
expand,  and  “  Yankee  ingenuity  ”  began  to 
“  beat  the  Dutch  !  ”  The  strong  reaction 
which  followed  the  witchcraft  delusion  was  the 


214 


A  R1  STOP  I  A. 


dawning  of  the  day  after  the  night  of  bigotry 
and  superstition  in  New  England. 

The  one  thing  in  which  the  Puritans  appear 
to  have  made  an  innovation  was  in  sawing 
lumber.  Somewhere  about  1640,  saw-mills, 
then  unknown  in  England,  were  introduced 
into  Massachusetts.  Some  of  the  Puritans  had 
seen  saw-mills  driven  by  water-power  during 
their  exile  in  Germany,  and,  strange  to  say, 
did  not  consider  them  a  device  of  Satan  to  en¬ 
slave  men’s  souls. 

In  Aristopia  every  public  school  had  a  large 
library  of  books  of  useful  knowledge,  and  every 
child  attended  school  for  twelve  or  fifteen 
years,  studying  not  Latin  and  theology,  but 
mathematics,  geography,  astronomy,  and  what 
was  then  known  of  chemical  science.  Improve¬ 
ment  was  a  matter  of  course,  and  innovation 
which  promised  improvement  was  welcomed. 


ABISTOPIA. 


215 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

The  storm-cloud  of  revolution  grew  darker 
and  darker  during  the  year  1774  and  the  first 
months  of  1775.  Boston  was  the  storm-center. 
The  stubborn  and  rebellious  colony  of  Massachu¬ 
setts  had  always  been  most  prominent  in  resist¬ 
ance  to  royal  and  parliamentary  interference 
with  its  government.  A  strong  garrison  of 
British  troops  had  been  stationed  in  the  rebel¬ 
lious  city. 

At  last,  one  April  day  in  1775,  the  news 
came  to  Aristopia  of  that  momentous  skirmish 
at  Lexington.  In  little  more  than  six  weeks 
after  this  news  had  reached  the  capital  of  Aris¬ 
topia,  five  thousand  well-drilled  and  well- 
equipped  Aristopian  soldiers  were  ready  to  em¬ 
bark  at  Mortonia  for  Boston,  with  a  battery  of 
six  twelve-pounder  brass  guns. 

Fearing  to  encounter  some  British  men-of- 
war  if  they  took  the  passage  outside  of  the 
capes,  the  expedition  went  by  water  to  the 
head  of  Chesapeake  Bay,  where  the  soldiers 
disembarked  and  marched  across  to  the  Dela- 


216 


ARISTOPIA. 


ware.  Re-embarking,  they  went  up  to  Trenton, 
where  they  again  landed  and  marched  across 
New  Jersey  to  Paulus  Hook,  opposite  New 
York  city. 

Embarking  again,  the  expedition  passed 
through  Hell  Gate  into  Long  Island  Sound, 
and  so  on  to  Providence.  There  they  landed 
and  marched  to  Boston. 

They  approached  the  Puritan  city  on  the 
morning  of  the  seventeenth  of  June.  From  a 
distance  they  heard  the  heavy  booming  of  the 
cannon.  They  supposed  it  was  only  the  British 
vessels  bombarding  the  patriot  fortifications. 
But  as  the  Aristopians  approached  nearer  they 
heard  the  sharp  rattle  of  musketry,  and  knew 
that  a  battle  was  in  progress.  The  sound 
quickened  and  lengthened  their  pace.  Already 
their  commander,  General  Morton,  a  great- 
grandson  of  Ralph  Morton,  had  received  a  dis¬ 
patch  from  General  Putnam,  informing  him 
that  the  British  were  making  a  stubborn  attack 
on  the  works  of  the  Americans,  and  directing 
his  march  to  Charlestown  Neck. 

The  Aristopians  received  the  order,  u  Double- 
quick  march  !  ”  On  went  the  long  column  at 
a  trot,  to  the  shrill,  lively  strains  of  “  Yankee 
Doodle,”  from  such  of  the  panting  fifers  as. 


ARISTOPIA. 


217 


could  keep  their  breath  and  their  place  along¬ 
side  of  the  musket-bearers.  When  the  head  of 
the  column  came  near  the  American  redoubt 
on  Breed’s  Hill,  the  first  regiment  swung  into 
line  of  battle  and  was  halted,  with  the  intention 
of  waiting  for  the  other  regiments  to  come  up 
and  form  on  the  left,  the  column  being  stretched 
out  about  a  mile  in  length.  But  there  was  no 
time  to  wait.  Already  the  British  on  their 
third  charge  had  reached  the  redoubt.  The 
powder  of  the  American  militia  had  given  out, 
and  they  had  no  bayonets.  The  red-coats 
swarmed  over  the  earth-works.  The  farmer- 
soldiers  resisted  a  minute  or  two,  using  their 
rifles  as  clubs,  and  then  fell  back. 

“  Forward,  march  !  ”  was  the  order  that  rang 
out  to  the  Aristopian  regiment ;  steadily  for¬ 
ward  went  the  long,  blue-coat  line  of  battle,  as 
steadily  as  ever  the  red-coat  line  had  come  on. 
Opening  their  ranks  in  places  to  let  the  retiring 
militia  through,  and  then  quickly  closing  them 
again,  they  moved  on  to  within  less  than  a 
hundred  steps  of  their  enemy,  when  they  halted. 
The  long  line  of  muskets  came  down  to  a  level 
and  a  crashing  volley  followed.  Then  down 
went  the  musket  breeches  and  up  the  bayonet 
points  to  a  charge,  and  with  an  impetuous- 


218 


ARISTOPIA. 


dash  the  Americans  were  upon  the  British, 
bayonet  to  bayonet,  and  instantly  the  enemy 
were  hurled  back  over  the  earth-works. 

Pausing  behind  the  works  to  reload,  the 
Aristopians  gave  their  foes  another  volley. 
Meanwhile  the  battery  came  thundering  to  the 
front,  and  quickly  unlimbering  on  the  right 
and  left  of  the  infantry,  poured  grape  upon 
the  broken  and  retreating  line  of  the  British. 

In  a  few  minutes  the  other  Aristopian  reg¬ 
iments  came  up,  and,  forming  on  the  left, 
drove  the  British  out  of  the  breastworks  of  hay 
and  rails,  stretching  down  to  the  Mystic  River, 
which  defenses  had  a  few  minutes  before  been 
given  up  by  the  farmer-soldiers  of  New  Hamp¬ 
shire. 

Thus  the  desperate  sally  of  the  British  ended 
in  utter  failure  and  terrible  loss. 

Then  the  siege  was  resumed,  and  the  six 
cannons  of  the  Aristopians  were  soon  hurling 
their  missiles  from  the  heights  down  upon  the 
British  men-of-war.  The  Aristopians  brought 
with  them  a  great  supply  of  powder,  the  supply 
of  the  besieging  army  had  become  completely 
exhausted,  threatening  the  failure  of  the  siege, 
but  thenceforth  there  was  no  lack,  as  fresh  sup¬ 
plies  were  hurried  forward  from  Aristopia. 


AEIS  TOPI  A. 


219 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

Let  us  leave  the  siege  of  Boston  to  view 
another  move  in  this  game  of  war  so  briskly 
opened. 

But  first  it  should  be  said  that  immediately 
on  the  publication  of  the  news  of  the  skirmish 
of  Lexington,  the  governor-general  of  Aristopia 
announced  the  purpose  of  the  fund  which 
Charles  Morton  had  provided  for  a  great  crisis 
in  the  history  of  Aristopia — the  war  of  independ¬ 
ence  for  the  commonwealth.  The  crisis  had 
come,  the  hour  had  struck.  The  fund,  origin¬ 
ally  three  million  dollars,  which  had  accumulated 
by  interest  to  about  seven  millions,  was  to  be 
used  by  the  commonwealth.  It  was  urged, 
however,  that  this  fund  alone  must  not  be 
depended  on.  Aristopia  must  freely  pour  out 
treasure  as  well  as  blood,  for  the  struggle 
would  be  desperate.  England  was  a  stubborn 
as  well  as  a  powerful  foe. 

At  the  very  beginning  of  the  struggle,  the 
government  of  Aristopia  decided  that  Canada 


220 


ARISTOPIA. 


must  be  conquered,  and  that  Aristopia  must  do 
it.  It  was  seen  that  the  British  population 
of  Canada,  fresh  from  England  and  Scotland^ 
would  not  rebel,  and  the  French  population 
dared  not.  Canada,  held  by  England,  would 
always  form  a  base  of  operation  against  the 
states,  and  a  safe  rendezvous  for  her  fleets. 
From  the  St.  Lawrence  she  could  harry  New 
England  with  her  soldiers  and  their  Indian 
allies.  By  way  of  Sorel  River  and  Lake  Cham¬ 
plain  she  could  invade  New  York.  From  Lake 
Erie  she  could  threaten  Aristopia,  although  she 
could  never  bring  force  enough  to  endanger 
the  commonwealth. 

In  the  systematic  manner  characteristic  of 
the  commonwealth,  the  enterprise  was  begun, 
carefully  concealed  even  from  the  leaders  of  the 
other  colonies,  even  from  Washington  himself, 
when  he  was  given  the  chief  command  of  the 
Continental  armies.  From  the  head  of  navi¬ 
gation  on  the  western  branch  of  Alleghany 
River  to  the  nearest  point  on  the  shore  of 
Lake  Erie  was  only  twenty  miles.  Between 
these  two  points  a  good  road  was  constructed. 

The  vessels  of  the  commonwealth  on  Lake 
Michigan  were  ordered  around  to  Lake  Erie. 
A  strong  expedition,  advancing  with  celerity 


ARISTOPIA. 


221 


and  secrecy,  captured  the  unsuspecting  British 
garrison  at  Fort  Niagara.  Pressing  on,  they 
built  a  saw-mill  on  a  creek  near  the  shore  of 
Lake  Ontario.  A  fort  was  quickly  erected,  a 
shipyard  constructed  near  the  mouth  of  Niagara 
River,  and  the  building  of  vessels  begun  as 
soon  as  possible. 

By  great  vigilance,  supplies  sent  by  the 
British  to  Fort  Niagara  were  captured,  and  in¬ 
formation  of  the  ship-building  on  Lake  Ontario 
was  prevented  from  coming  to  the  knowledge 
of  the  enemy. 

All  through  the  summer  of  1775  the  ship¬ 
builders,  brought  from  Boston  and  Baltimore, 
worked  on,  with  all  the  assistance  which  the 
skilled  mechanics  and  a  swarm  of  laborers  from 
Aristopia  could  give  them.  The  fleet  was  to 
be  a  strong  one,  for  the  commonwealth  deter¬ 
mined  that  no  second  blow  should  be  needed. 
The  foundries  of  Aristopia  were  now  turning 
out  as  heavy  and  as  good  guns  as  any  in  the 
world.  These  great  guns  were  brought  to  arm 
the  Ontario  fleet. 

It  was  a  debated  point  with  the  commander- 
in-chief  of  the  army  and  navy  of  Aristopia 
whether  the  blow  should  be  struck  in  the  fall 
of  1775  or  the  spring  of  1776,  but  events  de- 


222 


ARISTOPIA. 


cided  the  matter.  W ashington  himself,  ignorant 
of  the  designs  of  Aristopia,  determined  to  send 
two  expeditions  into  Canada  to  cut  off  the 
British  supplies.  One,  commanded  by  Arnold, 
went  through  the  wilderness  of  Maine  to  cap¬ 
ture  Quebec.  The  other,  commanded  by 
Montgomery,  went  by  way  of  Lake  Champlain 
to  capture  Montreal.  Both  expeditions  started 
in  August.  The  siege  of  St.  John’s,  on  the 
Sorel  River,  detained  Montgomery’s  force  the 
whole  month  of  September  and  part  of  October. 

At  last  the  expedition  from  Aristopia,  hast¬ 
ened  by  these  events,  left  the  station  on  Nia¬ 
gara  River  about  the  first  of  October.  There 
were  ten  large  and  heavily  armed  vessels  and 
some  smaller  transports.  Capturing  Kingston, 
at  the  outlet  of  Lake  Ontario,  with  hardly  an 
effort,  the  expedition  proceeded  down  the  St. 
Lawrence,  and  arrived  at  Montreal  without  ob¬ 
struction.  Montreal  was  defended  by  a  force 
of  a  few  hundred  men,  not  expecting  a  formid¬ 
able  attack.  About  two  weeks  before  the  ar¬ 
rival  of  the  Aristopian  expedition,  the  brave 
and  fiery,  but  eccentric  and  foolhardy,  Ethan 
Allen  had  attacked  the  place,  with  only  eighty 
men.  He  and  his  little  force  were  quickly  cap¬ 
tured.  But  the  formidable  expedition  of  Aris^ 


ARISTOPIA. 


223 


topia  was  irresistible,  and  the  British  at  Mont¬ 
real  immediately  surrendered.  A  strong  force 
was  hurried  across  the  country  to  St.  John’s, 
while  the  Aristopian  vessels  entered  the  Sorel 
and  captured  the  British  vessels  sent  to  relieve 
St.  John’s.  Carleton,  the  Governor  of  Canada, 
made  his  escape  from  one  of  these  vessels  in  a 
small  boat  at  night,  and  went  to  Quebec. 

The  British  force  at  St.  John’s  being  cap¬ 
tured,  the  expedition  proceeded  to  Quebec  as 
hastily  as  possible.  The  British  garrison  at  that 
strongpoint  had  been  warned  of  the  approaching 
attack,  but  they  were  entirely  too  weak  to  with¬ 
stand,  even  in  their  stronghold,  the  combined 
forces  of  the  Aristopians  and  General  Mont¬ 
gomery.  Seeing  themselves  besieged  by  a 
strong  fleet  on  the  river  and  a  numerous  army 
on  land,  with  winter  near  at  hand,  and  not  the 
slightest  hope  of  succor  from  England  before 
spring,  the  garrison  surrendered.  Among  the 
prisoners  was  Governor  Carleton.  Ethan  Al¬ 
len  and  his  little  band  were  also  recaptured. 

Winter  had  already  begun  in  that  high  lati¬ 
tude,  and  there  was  nothing  further  to  be  done. 
With  the  heavy  cannons  of  Aristopia  command¬ 
ing  the  St.  Lawrence  from  the  forts  at  Quebec, 
Montreal,  and  Kingston,  and  a  fleet  to  aid  the 


224 


ARISTOPIA. 


forts,  invasion  of  the  colonies  by  England,  by 
way  of  the  St.  Lawrence,  was  effectually  blocked. 
The  Aristopian  fleet  had  brought  abundant 
stores.  The  French  habitans  were  friendly  to 
the  Americans,  and  rejoiced  to  escape  from 
British  dominion.  No  trouble  whatever  in 
holding  the  country  was  expected. 

The  force  under  Montgomery  was  sent  back, 
in  the  transports  and  the  vessels  captured  from 
the  British,  by  way  of  the  Sorel  and  Lake 
Champlain,  to  New  York,  carrying  to  the  col¬ 
onies  the  first  news  of  the  complete  conquest  of 
Canada. 

Toward  the  middle  of  November,  the  expe¬ 
dition  under  Arnold,  in  a  desperate  plight  from 
the  hardships  they  had  endured  in  journeying 
through  the  wilderness,  half  the  time  without 
food,  exposed  to  the  storms  of  early  winter,  ar¬ 
rived  at  Quebec.  Arnold’s  force  was  reduced 
to  seven  hundred  and  fifty  men,  without  artil¬ 
lery  and  with  damaged  muskets.  What  would 
have  been  the  fate  of  this  desperate  commander 
and  his  few  but  brave  men,  if  the  expedition 
from  Aristopia  had  not  come  to  the  rescue,  can 
hardly  be  told.  They  would  certainly  have 
done  all  that  human  beings  in  their  circum¬ 
stances  could  have  done  to  capture  Quebec,  but 


ARISTOPIA. 


225 


must  have  perished  or  been  captured  in  the 
end.  The  surprise  and  joy  of  the  colonies  and 
the  consternation  of  England  at  the  easy  con¬ 
quest  of  Canada  were  great.  While  it  was  be¬ 
ing  effected  the  British  were  forced  to  evacu¬ 
ate  Boston. 

15 


226 


ARISTOPIA. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

It  is  not  the  purpose  of  this  work  to  narrate 
all  the  details  of  the  war  for  independence. 
Suffice  it  to  say  that,  during  all  the  war,  the 
power  and  wealth  of  Aristopia  formed  the  bul¬ 
wark  of  the  American  cause.  She  realized 
that  the  welfare  of  the  other  colonies  was  her 
interest.  Safe  from  invasion  herself,  she 
poured  out  men  and  means  to  repel  invasion 
of  the  Atlantic  colonies.  Every  port  on  the 
Atlantic  was  defended  by  great  cannons  cast 
in  Aristopia,  manned  by  well-trained  Aristo- 
pian  gunners.  Everywhere,  from  the  Kenne¬ 
bec  to  the  Savannah,  where  invasion  threat¬ 
ened,  there  were  seen  the  long  blue  lines  of 
the  brigades  of  Aristopia,  forming  a  firm  nu¬ 
cleus  around  which  might  rally  and  a  sure 
shield  behind  which  might  form  the  undis¬ 
ciplined  and  unskilled,  if  brave  and  ardent, 
patriots. 

The  soldiers  of  Aristopia  had  not  the  per¬ 
fect  marksmanship  and  the  self-reliant,  fierce^ 


ARISTOPIA. 


227 


semi-barbaric  fighting  spirit  of  the  frontiers¬ 
men  of  New  York,  Virginia,  and  the  Carolinas, 
which  made  those  men  the  best  skirmishers, 
sharpshooters,  and  bushrangers  of  the  world ; 
nor  the  red-hot  zeal,  implacable  hate,  and  stub¬ 
born  courage  of  the  New  Englanders.  But 
they  had  a  calm,  enduring  courage  of  their 
own,  and  they  had  besides,  what  all  the  others 
lacked :  steady  discipline,  willing  subordination 
to  their  commanders,  and  skill  in  the  tactics 
of  the  line  of  battle,  for  they  had  long  been 
drilled  by  men  who  had  fought  under  Frederic 
the  Great.  They  had,  too,  the  superiority 
which  is  ever  given  by  education  and  intelli¬ 
gence,  for  Aristopia  had  for  generations  been 
a  land  of  public  schools. 

Of  her  means  Aristopia  gave  as  freely  as  of 
her  men.  The  American  armies  were  armed 
with  Aristopian  cannon,  muskets,  bayonets,  and 
sabers.  The  mines  of  Mizouri  furnished  lead, 
and  the  caverns  of  Kentucky  the  saltpeter 
from  which  skillful  Aristopian  workmen  made 
their  powder.  The  troops  were  fed  largely 
with  flour  of  wheat  from  the  wood-embosomed 
fields  of  Ohio  and  the  prairie  farms  of  Elenwah. 
Ships  of  war  were  built  by  skillful  builders  at 
Boston,  New  York,  Baltimore,  and  Norfolk,  and 


228 


ARISTOPIA. 


manned  by  the  hardy  seamen  of  the  coasts; 
but  Aristopia  furnished  their  cannon,  powder, 
shot,  sails,  and  cordage. 

The  fund  furnished  by  Charles  Morton  sup¬ 
plied  the  commonwealth  with  the  gold  and 
silver  needed  to  pay  for  all  she  bought  out¬ 
side  of  her  own  borders ;  inside  those  borders 
the  public  revenues  paid  for  all.  The  other 
colonies  had  followed  the  example  of  Aristopia 
in  issuing  paper-money,  but  not  with  the  same 
success,  for  their  paper  money  depreciated 
badly,  while  that  of  Aristopia  was  always  at 
par  with  gold  and  silver.  Her  paper-money 
was  confined  to  its  proper  use  as  a  medium  of 
exchange  ;  that  of  the  other  colonies  was  used 
as  evidence  of  a  debt  the  payment  of  which 
was  very  doubtful.  In  Aristopia  paper-money 
was  not,  as  in  the  other  colonies,  an  expedient 
to  escape  from  the  pinch  of  the  poverty  of  to¬ 
day  by  a  promise  to  be  met  with  the  hoped- 
for  wealth  of  to-morrow. 

In  case  of  a  great  war,  it  is  common  to  say  : 
“  These  burdens  are  too  great  for  us  to  bear 
alone ;  let  posterity  share  them,  for  they  are 
borne  as  much  for  the  benefit  of  posterity  as 
for  ourselves.  Let  us  go  in  debt  and  let  the 
future  pay  the  debt.”  The  financiers  of  Aris- 


ARISTOPIA. 


229 


topia  were  trained  in  a  wiser  school.  They 
knew  that  most  war  loans  must  be  procured 
from  usurers,  and  be  paid  over  and  over  ;  that 
the  borrowing  generation  must  pay  all  or  more 
than  the  debt  in  interest  and  the  next  generation 
must  pay  it  in  principal  or  go  on  paying  it  over 
and  over  in  interest. 

True,  a  paper  currency  offers  a  means  of  a 
forced  loan  without  interest,  but  at  the  cost  of 
terribly  disordering  the  medium  of  exchange. 
In  Aristopia,  paper-money  being  issued  solely  as 
a  medium  of  exchange,  and  not  as  a  promise 
to  pay  a  debt,  no  more  and  no  less  was  issued 
than  the  wants  of  trade  demanded.  The 
Aristopian  paper-money  was  not  redeemable  in 
gold,  but  in  what  the  holders  needed  more 
than  gold — any  of  the  necessaries  or  luxuries 
of  life  to  be  had  in  the  market,  and  it  could 
not  depreciate. 

Every  invading  fleet  and  army  which  Eng¬ 
land  sent  over  to  America  was  either  repelled 
with  great  loss  to  the  invaders  or  captured. 
Nor  was  America  left  to  fight  her  battles  alone. 
The  arrogant  commercial  policy  into  which  Eng¬ 
land  had  been  driven  and  kept  by  the  clamors 
of  her  hordes  of  shopkeepers  and  traders,  had 
gained  her  the  enmity  of  all  maritime  Europe. 


230 


ARISTOPIA. 


Holland  was  eager  to  cripple  her  rival  on  the 
seas.  France  and  Spain,  although  their  des¬ 
potic  kings  little  liked  to  encourage  rebels  and 
republicans  in  America,  could  not  let  slip  the 
opportunity  to  satisfy  their  ancient  grudges. 
The  result  was  a  triple  European  alliance 
against  England. 

England  could  fight  three  European  nations 
single-handed,  but  she  could  do  nothing  toward 
conquering  America  in  addition.  France,  who 
had  so  recently  lost  the  greater  part  of  North 
America,  was  now  determined  that  England 
should  lose  it,  and  she  influenced  Spain  to  a 
like  determination.  England  could  not  now 
hope  to  gain  anything  by  continuing  the  war, 
and  had  much  to  lose.  Her  great  commerce 
was  being  destroyed.  The  only  alternative 
was  to  acknowledge  the  independence  of  the 
American  colonies,  and  to  this  humiliation  the 
stubborn  and  dauntless  mistress  of  the  seas  at 
last  consented. 

Before  the  war  was  ended,  the  statesmen  of 
Aristopia  were  considering  how  they  could  hold 
Canada.  The  French  habitans  of  Lower 
Canada,  including  New  Brunswick  and  Nova 
Scotia,  by  far  the  majority  of  the  population 
of  that  region,  were  very  willing  to  exchange 


ARISTOPIA. 


231 


the  dominion  of  England  for  statehood  in  the 
American  republic.  But  a  majority  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  province  of  Ontario  were 
English  and  Scotch,  recent  immigrants.  They 
certainly  would  not  have  rebelled  against  Eng¬ 
land.  Whether  they  would  consent  to  unite 
with  the  other  colonies  was  doubtful.  Many 
of  them  certainly  would  not.  They  were  few 
in  number,  and  their  majority  in  the  region 
might  be  overcome.  The  Congress  of  Aristo- 
pia  made  an  appropriation  to  pay  the  expenses 
of  ten  thousand  families  from  Ohio  and  Alle¬ 
ghany,  who  consented  to  go  and  settle  along 
the  northern  shores  of  Lake  Erie  and  Ontario 
and  on  the  peninsula  opposite  Detroit.  This 
completely  turned  the  scale,  and  it  was  now 
certain  that  a  majority  of  the  inhabitants  of 
Upper  Canada  were  in  favor  of  union  with  the 
other  colonies  and  independence  of  Great 
Britain. 

The  Acadians,  remembering  with  fondness 
their  old  home,  were  induced  to  return  there. 
Their  friendship  for  Aristopia  made  them 
favor  a  union  of  Nova  Scotia  with  the  other 
colonies. 

So,  when  England  objected  to  giving  up  Can¬ 
ada  on  the  ground  that  it  had  not  revolted,  but 


232 


AMSTOPIA. 


had  been  overrun  by  the  Americans,  a  vote  of 
the  duly  elected  legislatures  of  all  the  provinces 
of  Canada  demanded  independence  of  England 
and  union  with  the  other  colonies. 


ARISTOPIA. 


233 


CONCLUSION. 

After  the  war  of  independence  the  six  states 
of  Aristopia  rapidly  expanded  their  boundaries 
and  settlements  to  the  great  lakes  on  the 
north  and  a  hundred  miles  south  of  the  Ohio 
River.  The  stations  on  the  route  to  the  cop¬ 
per  mines  and  to  New  Orleans  became  the 
germs  which  quickly  grew  into  new  states. 
Having  by  far  the  most  desirable  and  fertile 
part  of  the  continent,  immigration  from  Europe 
to  Aristopia  was  much  greater  than  to  the 
Atlantic  States,  and  from  her  favorable  con¬ 
ditions  of  life  the  natural  increase  of  her  popu¬ 
lation  was  more  rapid  than  that  in  any  other 
part  of  America.  The  Aristopian  population 
dominated  the  Canadian  State  of  Ontario 
and  introduced  there  their  peculiar  political 
economy. 

The  other  states  were  at  first  fearful  of  a 
close  union  with  Aristopia,  jealous  of  her  over¬ 
shadowing  power.  But  gradually  the  leaven 
of  Aristopian  political  economy  worked  in  the 


234 


APIS  TOPI  A. 


other  states,  until  at  last  all  America,  from  the 
Rio  Grande  to  the  most  northern  settlements 
of  Canada,  became  one  solid  nation,  a  Common¬ 
wealth  in  fact  as  well  as  in  name,  whose  citi¬ 
zens,  safe  in  their  aggregate  wealth  and  power 
from  fear  of  foreign  foes,  turned  not  their  fight¬ 
ing  force  against  each  other,  in  a  social  and  com¬ 
mercial  war — none  the  less  war  because  other 
weapons  than  those  of  steel  and  gunpowder 
were  used.  Such  civil  war  devastated  every 
other  civilized  nation  of  the  globe,  even  when 
they  deceived  themselves  with  the  belief  that 
they  were  enjoying  profound  peace.  In  this 
new  nation  was  realized  the  dream  of  the  social 
philosophers  and  philanthropists  of  all  ages :  a 
government  of  the  people,  by  the  people,  and 
for  the  people,  resting  on  the  deep  and  solid 
foundations  of  Liberty,  Equality,  and  Fra¬ 
ternity. 


From  the  press  of  the  Arena  Publishing  Company. 


Fiction :  Social,  'Economic  anti  Reformatiue. 


E.  Stillman 
Doubleday 


A  story  of  the 
Struggles  of 
Honest  Industry 
under  Present 
Day  Conditions. 


Charles  S. 
Daniel 


A  Story  of  the 
Transformation 
of  the  Slums 


Price,  paper,  50  cents ;  cloth ,  $1.25. 

JUST  PLAIN  FOLKS. 

A  novel  for  the  industrial  millions,  illustrating  two  stu¬ 
pendous  facts :  — 

1 .  The  bounty  and  goodness  of  nature. 

.  2.  The  misery  resulting  from  unjust  social  conditions 
which  enable  the  acquirer  of  wealth  to  degenerate  in 
luxury  and  idleness,  and  the  wealth  producer  to  slave  him¬ 
self  to  death,  haunted  by  an  ever-present  fear  of  starva¬ 
tion  when  not  actually  driven  to  vice  or  begging.  It  is  an 
exceedingly  interesting  book,  simply  and  affectingly  told, 
while  there  is  a  vast  deal  of  the  philosophy  of  commun¬ 
ism  in  the  moralizing  of  Old  Bat.  All  persons  interested  in 
wholesome  fiction,  and  who  also  desire  to  understand  the 
conditions  of  honest  industry  and  society-made  vice, 
should  read  this  admirable  story. 


Price,  paper,  50  cents  ;  cloth,  $1.25. 

AI :  A  Social  Vision. 

One  of  the  most  ingenious,  unique  and  thought-provoking 
stories  of  the  present  generation.  It  is  a  social  vision,  and  in 
many  respects  the  most  noteworthy  of  the  many  remarkable 
dreams  called  forth  by  the  general  unrest  and  intellectual  activ¬ 
ity  of  the  present  generation.  But  unlike  most  social  dreams 
appearing  since  the  famous  “  Utopia  ”  of  Sir  Thomas  More, 
this  book  has  distinctive  qualities  which  will  commend  it  to 
many  readers  who  take,  as  yet,  little  interest  in  the  vital  social 
problems  of  the  hour.  A  quiet  humor  pervades  the  whole  vol¬ 
ume  which  is  most  delightful. 

The  brotherhood  of  man  and  various  sociological  and  philan¬ 
thropic  ideas,  such  as  the  establishment  of  a  college  settlement 
and  the  social  regeneration  of  Old  Philadelphia,  are  a  few  of 
the  topics  discussed  in  “  Ai,”  a  novel  by  Charles  Daniel,  whc 
calls  it  “  A  Social  Vision.”  It  is  alternately  grave  and  gay;  am 
the  intellectual  freshness  reminds  one  constantly  of  Edward 
Everett  Hale’s  stories,  with  which  “  Ai  ”  has  much  in  common. 
This  is  a  clever  book,  and,  what  is  much  more  important,  one 
whose  influence  is  for  good.  —  Public  Ledger. 


From  the  press  of  the  Arena  Publishing  Company . 


Fiction :  Social,  Economic  an6  Keformatiue. 


Price ,  paper ,  50  cents',  cloth ,  $1.25. 


Byron 
A.  Brooks 


The 

New  Utopia 


EARTH  REVISITED. 

A  story  for  earnest  men  and  women  of  the  new  time. 
Mr.  Flower,  in  “  Civilization’s  Inferno,”  portrays  some 
hideous  phases  of  modern  civilization.  Mr.  Brooks,  in 
“  Earth  Revisited,”  pictures  our  earth  blossoming  in 
peace,  joy  and  happiness,  under  cooperation.  This  story, 
which  is  charming  as  a  pure,  clean  love  story,  is  made  the 
vehicle  for  shadowing  forth  an  ideal  civilization  through 
the  working  of  the  law  of  all  for  all.  Few  social  studies 
are  so  helpful  in  psychical  suggestions  as  “  Earth  Revis¬ 
ited,”  and  probably  this  work  more  than  any  other  Uto¬ 
pian  romance  sustains  the  interest  of  the  reader  from  first 
to  last. 


Price,  paper ,  50  cents;  cloth ,  $1.25. 


Hamlin 


JASON  EDWARDS. 


Garland 


A  powerfully 
Dramatic  Novel, 
dealing  with  the 
Struggles  of  the 
Poor  in  City  and 
Country 


This  work  is  one  of  the  most  powerful  portrayals  of  the 
struggles  of  the  mechanic  in  the  city  and  the  farmer  in  the 
West  ever  published.  It  is  highly  dramatic  while  per¬ 
fectly  realistic,  and  though  it  ends  in  a  burst  of  sunshine, 
its  noble  lessons  will  linger  in  the  heart. 

Hamlin  Garland’s  splendid  qualities  —  his  sympathy  with 
humanity,  his  perception  of  the  subtlest  meaning  of  nature,  his 
power  to  bring  his  people  before  you  as  if  you  had  grown  up 
in  their  dooryards  —  these  are  his  own. 

Mary  E.  Wilkins  has  given  us  the  pathos  of  humblest  New 
England;  Charles  Egbert  Craddock  has  made  known  to  us  the 
secrets  of  the  Tennessee  Mountains;  Rudyard  Kipling  has 
carried  us  to  India;  and  now,  at  last,  here  is  the  story-teller  of 
farm  life  in  those  Western  prairies  among  which  Hamlin  Gar¬ 
land  grew  up,  to  which  he  goes  back,  now  and  again,  with  the 
child’s  heart,  the  man’s  insight. —  Louise  Chandler  Moulton ,  in 
Boston  Herald. 

For  sale  by  all  newsdealers ,  or  sent  postpaid  by 

Arena  Publishing  Co.,  Boston,  Mass. 